The Project Gutenberg eBook of The man that rum made
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The man that rum made
        with temperance lessons and stories

Editor: James Edson White
        Mrs. L. D. Avery-Stuttle


        
Release date: August 24, 2026 [eBook #79442]

Language: English

Original publication: Nashville: Southern Publishing Association, 1912

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/79442

Credits: Charlene Taylor, Harry Lamé and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN THAT RUM MADE ***


  Transcriber’s Notes

  Texts printed in italics and bold face in the source document
  have been transcribed between _underscores_ and =equal signs=
  respectively. Small capitals have been transcribed as ALL CAPITALS.

  More Transcriber’s Notes may be found at the end of this text.




  THE
  Man That Rum Made

  WITH

  Temperance Lessons and
  Stories


  “_Every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate
  in all things._” “_So run, that ye may obtain._”


  [Illustration: SABBATH READINGS
  FOR THE HOME CIRCLE]


  Edited by
  J. E. WHITE AND MRS. L. D. AVERY-STUTTLE


  PUBLISHED BY
  SOUTHERN PUBLISHING ASSOCIATION
  NASHVILLE, TENN.




  COPYRIGHTED, 1912,
  _By Nashville Book Company_.

  _All Rights Reserved._




CONTENTS


                                                                    Page
  Picture Story,--The Man That Rum Made                             4-15
  Picture Story,--Effects of Alcohol                               16-31
  Old Joe the Drunkard,--in Six Chapters                           32-70
  Effects of Stimulants                                               71
  Uncle Ben’s Story                                                   96
  Jacob Bell’s Vow                                                   100
  Testimony of Religious Bodies                                      109
  Only A Glass of Beer                                               110
  Important Testimony                                                111
  Alcohol a Cause of Disease                                         112
  Turning Over A New Leaf                                            113
  In the House of His Friends                                        127
  The Sign Board                                                     135
  Dan Naylor’s Legacy                                                141
  Don’t Let Him Have It                                              146
  Only the Husk                                                      154
  The Serpent in the Home                                            164
  Work Done Inside                                                   174
  Nat Raymond’s Victory                                              176
  Tom’s Temperance Lecture                                           183
  A Little Child Shall Lead Them                                     190
  Prohibition,--Does It Prohibit                                     202
  Cigarette Poison                                                   205
  Made a Drunkard by His Cigar                                       206
  Slaughter of the Innocents                                         209
  The Major’s Cigar                                                  217
  Why He Didn’t Smoke                                                223
  Experiences of John B. Gough                                       228
  Talmage on Tobacco                                                 231
  The Curse of the Nation,--Six Chapters                             233




[Illustration: DANGER-SIGNALS

    This is the man
      that rum made]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: DANGER-SIGNALS

    This is the weed
      that sowed the seed
    For making the man
      that rum made]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: DANGER-SIGNALS

    This is the cider,
      the rumseller’s tinder,
    That goes with the weed
      that sowed the seed
    For making the man
      that rum made]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: DANGER-SIGNALS

    This is the beer,
      the jolly good lager,
    Firm friend of cider,
      the rumseller’s tinder,
    That goes with the weed
      that sowed the seed
    For making the man
      that rum made]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: DANGER-SIGNALS

    This is the wine,
      the red, red wine,
    Alluring from beer,
      the jolly good lager,
    Firm friend of cider,
      the rumseller’s tinder,
    That goes with the weed
      that sowed the seed
    For making the man
      that rum made]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: DANGER-SIGNALS

    This is the whisky,
      to make you tipsy,
    That follows the wine,
      the red, red wine,
    Alluring from beer,
      the jolly good lager,
    Firm friend of cider,
      the rumseller’s tinder,
    That goes with the weed
      that sowed the seed
    For making the man
      that rum made]

[Illustration:

  PURE SOUR MASH WHISKY
  DEATH & CO WHOLESALE & RETAIL]

[Illustration:

    This is the nose that blossoms and grows
    On the face of the man that rum made.]

[Illustration:

  FREE LUNCH WITH LAGER
  BEER
  WINES
  LIQUORS]

[Illustration:

    This is the cheek, all flabby and weak,
    By the side of the nose that blossoms and grows
    On the face of the man that rum made.]

[Illustration]

[Illustration:

    This is the eye, all bleared and awry,
    Surmounting the cheek, so flabby and weak,
    By the side of the nose that blossoms and grows
    On the face of the man that rum made.]

[Illustration]

[Illustration:

    This is the throat of the whisky bloat,
    Below the eye, all bleared and awry,
    Surmounting the cheek, so flabby and weak,
    By the side of the nose that blossoms and grows
    On the face of the man that rum made.]

[Illustration]

[Illustration:

    This is the story the stomach will tell,--
    The stomach that once was healthy and well,--
    Far worse than the throat of the whisky bloat,
    Below the eye, all bleared and awry,
    Surmounting the cheek, so flabby and weak,
    By the side of the nose that blossoms and grows
    On the face of the man that rum made.]

[Illustration:

  _A_ _Healthy Stomach_
  _B_ _Stomach of Drunkard_
  _C_ _Stomach of Drunkard with Delirium Tremens_]

[Illustration:

    This is the liver, all pickled and shrunk,
    Produced by the alcohol, making him drunk,
    Thus aiding the story the stomach will tell,--
    The stomach that once was healthy and well,--
    Far worse than the throat of the whisky bloat,
    Below the eye, all bleared and awry,
    Surmounting the cheek, so flabby and weak,
    By the side of the nose that blossoms and grows
    On the face of the man that rum made.]

[Illustration]

[Illustration:

    This is the group of little blood cells,
    Each crippled and killed by the poison which tells,
    So fatal to liver, all pickled and shrunk,
    Produced by the alcohol, making him drunk,
    Thus aiding the story the stomach will tell,--
    The stomach that once was healthy and well,--
    Far worse than the throat of the whisky bloat,
    Below the eye, all bleared and awry,
    Surmounting the cheek, so flabby and weak,
    By the side of the nose that blossoms and grows
    On the face of the man that rum made.]

[Illustration]

[Illustration:

    This is the wreck that alcohol made
    Of the man who once was sober and staid,
    Whose blood was diseased by the little blood cells
    Being crippled or killed by the poison which tells,
    So fatal to liver, all pickled and shrunk,
    Produced by the alcohol, making him drunk,
    Thus aiding the story the stomach will tell,--
    The stomach that once was healthy and well,--
    Far worse than the throat of the whisky bloat,
    Below the eye, all bleared and awry,
    Surmounting the cheek, so flabby and weak,
    By the side of the nose that blossoms and grows
    On the face of the man that rum made.]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: _Grandma Duncan and the Children_]




OLD JOE, THE DRUNKARD

BY MRS. L. D. AVERY-STUTTLE


[Illustration]

Grandma Duncan lived with her three grandchildren in a pleasant village
nestled among the green hills of New Hampshire. Grandmother had a habit
of taking the children, Bertha, Max, and Henri, out for a walk over the
hills, on pleasant days, and much the children enjoyed these rambles.

“There is nothing,” grandmother used to say, “that I so desire as to
see the children of my dear daughter (who left them to my care,) grow
up to be good and virtuous.”

Grandmother’s hair was white as snow, but her eyes were as bright and
blue as the skies, her voice was soft and tender, and the children of
the whole neighborhood loved to listen to her quaint stories of the
time when she was a child; while to Bertha, Max, and Henri, grandmother
was very dear.

One afternoon, when the May flowers were showing their pretty, fresh
faces on the hills and meadows, and the sun was shining brightly, they
all went for their accustomed walk. The children soon filled their
baskets with trailing arbutus, jonquils, and soft mosses, and just
as the sun was setting, grandma and little Bertha strolled leisurely
homeward, while Max and Henri hurried on before.

“You shall be Queen of the May, grandma, dear,” laughed Bertha. “See, I
shall crown you with these pretty jonquils as soon as we are home.”

Just then Max and Henri came running back panting and quite out of
breath, both eager to tell what they had just seen over the hill.

“O grandma!” began Henri, “there is a poor man lying asleep by the
bridge, all covered with mud--”

“Yes,” added Max, “yes, and his face is red and specked, and--O Henri,
did you notice that his old battered hat was floating around in that
pool of muddy water by his side?”

“I’m afraid it is poor Joe Brandon,” sighed grandma. “Let us hasten;
perhaps we may be able to help him. He may be really ill,--though much
I fear he has stayed too long at the Red Lion,” as the one saloon in
the village was named.

By this time poor Joe had awakened from his drunken stupor, and was
staggering on toward his wretched home as fast as his unsteady legs
would carry him. His filth-covered coat was reeking with slime and mud,
which constantly dripped over his ragged trousers, while his wet and
battered hat, which the poor fellow had contrived to rescue from the
pool, was slouched far over his face. His gray hair and beard were long
and matted, and his eyes were bleared and bloodshot.

[Illustration: _POOR OLD JOE_]

The children shrank as far away from him as possible, as he reeled past
them, and all the laughter and pleasant mirth had gone out of their
voices, while little Bertha’s face had grown quite white.

“I cannot blame you, my dears, for shunning the wretched man, and yet
he was not always so,” sighed grandma.

“Why grandma,” protested Henri, who thought himself quite a man, “he
has been a poor drunkard ever since I can remember,--and that is ever
and ever so many years,--why just think; I am almost twelve years old.”

“Yes, but you know, my dear, I can remember very many more years than
that,--and I knew poor old Joe when he was no more than five years
old. And a sweet, charming child he used to be.”

“O grandma! please tell us about it,” cried the children excitedly,
“please do!”

So as soon as they were home and well rested, they gathered around
grandma’s great rocking chair. Henri had kindled a fire in the grate,
for it was rather cool, and now they waited to hear the story she had
promised to tell them.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Well, my children,” she began, “it is quite true that I knew poor
old Joe when he was a sweet, innocent child,--I was a child myself,
then,”--and grandmother gazed dreamily at the red flames as they chased
each other up the chimney.

“Yes, he was a sweet, innocent child,” she repeated; “Nobody called him
‘Old Joe,’ then. He was the only son of my father’s dear friend, and I
was his playmate while we were children.”

[Illustration: _LITTLE JOE_]

“O grandmother!” said little Bertha. “How could he ever grow to be such
a bad man?”

“It was not all at once, my child, but little by little. You remember
the tiny seed you planted in the pot last year and how we watched it
day by day as it grew slowly. Don’t you remember how it put out first
one little green leaf after another until it became a tall, strong
plant?”

“Yes, grandma, it was so small I thought it would not grow at first,
but I watered it and kept it in the sunny window, and now it’s quite a
big tree.”

“Well, my child, it is just so with bad habits. They grow just as fast
as weeds.

“I will try to tell you all about it, my children, though it is a long
story. I hope you will listen thoughtfully, for poor old Joe’s life
story is almost the same as that of many thousands of poor drunkards in
this rum-cursed land.”

“O grandma! are there thousands of people as miserable and wretched
as this poor man?” questioned Henri, opening his brown eyes wide; “it
doesn’t seem at all possible. I’m so sorry for them,” he continued, for
Henri had a very tender heart and was full of sympathy for every one in
trouble.

“I hope you will be sorry for them,” replied grandma, “so sorry that
you will do all in your power, as long as you live, to help them to
lead better lives and to shun the very first step toward a life of
intemperance and shame; for you must not forget, my boy, that no
man becomes a worthless sot in a day or a month or even a year. In
this, as in everything else, the little things are those which count.
Indeed, life is made up of little things,--little duties neglected,
little deeds undone, little burdens unborne,--these all help to make a
careless, selfish, unlovely character.

“I remember that poor Joe was very selfish as a lad, and this most
undesirable trait grew upon him as the years went by, until finally he
would not scruple to do anything mean, or rude, or anything dishonest,
if thereby he might gratify his appetite.”

“What do you think the poor old man would have said,” questioned
Max, “when he was a young boy, to have seen a picture of himself as
he looked to-day, wallowing in the mud, just like the big pig in Mr.
Brown’s meadow!” and Max shuddered.

“He would have been greatly shocked, I dare say, but I almost question
whether, then, he would have been willing to quit his selfish and
gluttonous habits; for poor Joe was a great glutton, even when a small
boy,” explained grandma, “though, as I have said, he was a bright and
lovable little fellow.”

“A great glutton!” repeated Max wonderingly. “I supposed a glutton was
a person who ate too much food. I didn’t think that the kind or amount
of food a person ate had anything to do with his becoming a drunkard.
Does it grandma?” And Max awaited the reply of his grandma with some
anxiety, for he was very fond of sweets and rich pastry.

“Yes, yes, my child; the kind and quantity of food we eat has very much
to do with the making or spoiling of our lives.”

“Joe’s father and mother were good people, who tried to bring their
little boy up to control his appetite; for they were wise and prudent,
and well knew the evil effects of gluttony upon both body and soul. But
they died when Joe was very young, and left him to the care of his aunt.

“Aunt Maggie was a good woman, but she made a great mistake in allowing
Joe to eat anything and everything he wanted, and at any time he
pleased. She seemed to forget that the stomach needs rest as well as
the other parts of the body, when we are tired.”

“Isn’t that queer?” laughed Bertha. “I never thought of it in that way
before.”

“Many people either forget or do not know that this is true,” continued
grandma, “and overload their poor, tired stomachs, and force them to
work when they are weary and need rest, until they become weak and
wretched and full of disease.

“Joe was very fond of sweetmeats,” continued grandma, looking hard
at Max, “but at first, he contented himself with coaxing his aunt
for them. But when he grew larger, he did not always wait to ask for
candies and preserves and rich cake. Aunt Maggie, as we called her,
kept a large supply of rich and highly seasoned food constantly on
hand, and when Joe was ashamed to ask for any more, he would manage to
steal as much as he wanted from the cupboard. This he did quite often,
and it troubled me not a little,” and grandma sighed.

“Why didn’t you tell your mother or Aunt Maggie of the young rascal?”
interrupted Henri, who scorned anything like falsehood or theft.

“I feared that he would not play with me if I did; but I have regretted
my childish thoughtlessness many times; for perhaps if I had been more
faithful in doing what I could for him, poor Joe might not now be the
miserable wreck he is.”

“Just think of our grandmother ever wanting to play with that horrible
old creature!” exclaimed Bertha, “though of course he was not always
so; but I can’t see, yet, grandma, what all this has to do with making
poor Joe a drunkard. Will you tell us?”

“If you will be patient, my child. It is quite a long story, and I want
you to be fully impressed with its truthfulness, and to understand me.

“One day I went over to play with Joey, as we children used to call
him. I was only about five years old, and Joey was six. My parents
thought him a good child, and since he was the son of my father’s
best-loved friend, they allowed me to play with him very often.

“Aunt Maggie had a jar of choice preserves, and another jar of highly
seasoned and spiced pickles. These she kept in the cupboard on a high
shelf, out of reach of naughty, mischievous fingers. That day after
we had become tired of our blocks and marbles, Joey asked Aunt Maggie
for a dish of preserves. She very kindly gave us each a dish, with
some bread and butter, and shortly afterward, put on her bonnet to go
down the street. She did not forget to caution us not to get into any
mischief.

“But as soon as she was out of sight, Master Joey decided to have as
many cookies and plates of preserves as he wanted. At once he climbed
into a high chair and helped himself. I was never allowed such freedom
as this at home, and in my childish way, tried to explain to my
playfellow that it was wrong. But he paid small heed to my words and
ate until he became quite sick.

[Illustration]

“By this time Aunt Maggie had returned, and though poor Joey tried hard
to deceive her as to the cause of his illness, the greedy boy had quite
forgotten to wash his face, which, in his haste, had become smeared
with preserves.

“Aunt Maggie made him drink a cupful of bitter herbs, and I ran home to
my mother.”




OLD JOE, THE DRUNKARD

PART TWO


[Illustration]

The next day I went to see poor Joe, but he was too sick to play with
me.”

“I think he must have learned a lesson by this time,” ventured Bertha.

“O no, my child, you see he has not even yet learned to control his
appetite, and it has nearly proved his ruin, and surely must unless he
repents very soon, and turns from his evil ways. Instead of learning a
useful lesson from that day’s folly, his craving for sweets and rich
foods seemed to grow stronger from that time. He always called for the
most highly seasoned food whenever he would come to spend the day with
me,--the greasiest meat, the strongest pickles, the richest puddings.

“One day at our table my mother helped him to some food. At once Joey
called for the pepper. ‘It is not good for you, child,’ said my mother,
mildly. But Joey insisted until she allowed him to cover his food with
pepper till it was quite black. He was very indignant indeed when
mother told him that she never allowed me such highly seasoned food,
and the young gentleman declared at once that if he could not have
what he wanted to eat, he would go home where he could get as much as
he pleased, and that he would never come to play with me again.

[Illustration: “_PEPPER_”]

“O my children! I hope you will never forget that appetite is like
fire;” and grandma sighed; “it is a good servant, but a bad master. You
see that in poor Joe’s case it has proved to be a strong giant, from
whose dreadful chains he has no power to release himself.”

“I suppose,” ventured Bertha, “that he began drinking rum when he was
just a little boy.”

“O no; the taste for liquor is not formed in a moment. All this time he
was an intelligent, bright, and active lad, and I liked to play with
him very much. Until he was about eight years old, he drank nothing but
water or milk. But by this time, the rich foods and spices, the pepper
and the strong, fiery pickles, with which he had so often filled his
stomach, created a longing for something stronger than milk and water
to drink.

“‘Come, Aunt Maggie,’ he pleaded, one day, ‘come; please let me have a
little taste of your tea--just a little.’”

“Of course, he got it,” said Bertha.

“O yes, and before long, he ran slily into the pantry, and drank still
another large cup. When I threatened to tell Aunt Maggie, he only
smiled and replied: ‘I love it, I tell you; it’s good! if it doesn’t
hurt Aunt Maggie, it won’t hurt me. If it’s good for women, it’s good
for boys, and I shall have what I like--there now!’

“I was a timid little girl,” continued grandma, smiling gravely, “and
Joe’s logic as well as his bravado rather appealed to me, and so I said
nothing. When it came time for me to go home that day, he went a little
piece with me, as was his custom:--

“‘I wonder if Aunt Maggie thinks that was my first cup of tea,’
reflected Joe, turning confidentially to me, ‘’cause if she does, she’s
mistaken, that’s all; and what’s more, I’ve got so I just hanker after
it--and good, strong coffee, too. Aunt Maggie thinks it’s expensive, I
guess; but I don’t believe she thinks it hurts anybody, or she would
not drink it herself. I tell you, Jennie Brown’--Joey used to call me
by my full name whenever he was excited,--‘when I get to be a man,--a
big man,--I’ll have what I want to eat,--I tell you,--and--and--_what I
want to drink_, too, or I’ll know the reason why!’ he added, pompously
bringing one little fist down into the palm of the other hand.

“‘O Joey, Joey!’ I cried; ‘you don’t mean to be a horrid old drunkard!’
Joe flashed a look of defiance back at me:--

“‘Don’t you suppose, Jennie Brown, that I mean to be a gentleman--a
gentleman, like my father used to be?--Well, I do, but I guess a
little tea and coffee’ll not hurt me any,--and look here, sissy, I’ll
tell you something if you’ll never tell,’ he continued, putting his
small fingers across my lips; ‘look here; I’ve noticed that a great
many _gentlemen_ smoke and chew tobacco, and just as soon as I get a
little bigger,--you just wait!’ and Joey assumed a swaggering gait,
and puckering his red lips, puffed a cloud of imaginary smoke from an
imaginary pipe. Then he turned on his heel, and called a cheery good-by
to me.

[Illustration: “I love it, I tell you; it’s good!”]

“But into my young heart had crept a vague fear that between my little
playmate and myself there would be, some day, ‘_a great gulf fixed_!’”




OLD JOE, THE DRUNKARD

PART THREE


[Illustration]

It doesn’t seem a bit possible!” exclaimed Bertha, “that this awful
looking old man could have been a nice little boy,--nice enough to
_ever_ have been my grandma’s playmate!”

“No,” reflected Max, “I didn’t dream that just tea and coffee ever
helped to make drunkards,--very many people surely use them both,--nice
people, too, grandma.”

“But it does not always have this effect, my dear, and we may
be thankful, but it is certainly one of the stepping stones to
intemperance.”

“But I don’t understand why,” said Max, who always wanted to know the
reason for everything. “Can’t you tell us, grandma, why tea and coffee
are so bad? ’Cause if they are, I’ll never drink another cup of either
again, as long as I live,--for I don’t want to run any risk at all of
being a drunkard,--isn’t that what you say, too, Henri?”

“Indeed, it is,--no drunkard for me, I tell you! but may be grandma
will tell us a little more about it,” and Henri put his boyish cheek
close to grandma’s and gave her two or three hearty kisses. “Please
tell us, grandma.”

“Well, my children, both tea and coffee contain a very deadly poison,
but in so small a quantity that we do not at once feel the evil
effects.”

“No, grandma; I have often heard Mrs. Wilson, the grocer’s wife, say
that she could not work until she had had her cup of tea.”

“That is because it stimulates the system,” said grandma. “I will make
it plain to you. Do you remember in our walk this afternoon, we saw a
cruel driver whipping his poor horse to make him pull his heavy load up
the hill?”

[Illustration: _Mrs. Wilson’s Tea_

_The Whip_]

“Yes, yes; and I felt like snatching the whip away from the wicked
man,” said Henri.

“It would have been wiser and better for him to take off a part of the
load instead of whipping his poor, patient horse. Still, you remember
how much quicker the poor beast drew his burden to the top.

“Now, my children, tea and coffee act on the body just as the driver’s
whip did upon the horse. Perhaps we can do more work at the time by
drinking it, but, like the horse, when we have done the work, we are
completely exhausted, and feel the need of more and more of the poison.”

“I just knew grandma could make it plain to you boys,” smiled
Bertha,--“but I believe _I_ understood it quite well all the time. But
please go on with the story about Joe, grandma, I want to see how it
all comes out.”

“Why, my child, you _saw_ how it came out,--saw it all too plainly,
this afternoon, when you saw poor old Joe as he reeled by us,” and
grandma sighed, while a tear stole down her cheeks. “Yes, you _saw_ how
my story must end; but I will tell you the steps which poor Joe next
took:--

“When he was about ten years old, I went over again one day to play
with him. As I have said, he was a pleasant and lively playfellow,
generally good natured, and always ready to build me playhouses and
never laughed at my dolls.

“After we had played for some time, Joey began to act uneasy. ‘What’s
the matter, Joey?’ I asked. ‘See, you are spoiling my playhouse, and it
just suited me. You act as if you didn’t want to play at all; I’ll go
right home unless,--”

“‘O, don’t be a silly sissy!’ exclaimed Joey, ‘I didn’t mean to spoil
your playhouse,--but, look here, Jennie Brown, _I’m_ getting dreadful
thirsty!’

“‘Well, then, go and get a drink of water. See, Aunt Maggie has just
pumped a nice fresh pail.’

“‘See here’ said Joey, ‘you needn’t think I’m such a sissy and ninny
as to drink _water_ when I can get something else that’s a whole lot
better!’

“He winked at me very slily, and turning on his heel, he beckoned me
to follow. I was so curious to know what he was going to do, that I
dropped my dolls and scampered after him. As we passed the kitchen
window, he peeped in cautiously, to assure himself that Aunt Maggie
was so busy that she would not be apt to see him, and then he again
beckoned me to follow him down the back cellar stairs:--

“‘What are you going to do, Joey?’ I whispered, almost frightened at
his strange actions.

“‘Sh--sh--! speak lower. See! I’m going to have a good drink of Aunt
Maggie’s cider. She’s been saving it for weeks and weeks to make
vinegar of,--but it’s good enough to suit me, now,’ he chuckled, as he
produced a long straw, and, inserting it in the hole of the barrel,
took a long, deep draft, and offered the straw to me:--

“‘I tell you, it’s good. Come, help yourself. It makes a fellow
feel nice all over. When I take a little bit too much, it gives me
a headache, and Aunt Maggie makes me a good, strong cup of tea,’ he
chuckled, ‘so I don’t care very much after all.’”

“But did you drink, grandma?” gasped Bertha.

“I tasted it, but it was so bitter I couldn’t drink it, nor did I want
to do so. Then we tip-toed back into the kitchen. Aunt Maggie gave Joe
a keen glance, but she said nothing, and we hurried out again to our
play.

[Illustration: “_You oughtn’t to do that, Joey._”]

“‘You oughtn’t to do that, Joey,’ I said, looking fearlessly into his
bright brown eyes, ‘I just know you ought not; what would Aunt Maggie
say?’

“‘It doesn’t harm her any,’ he returned; ‘the old lady will have a
little less vinegar, that’s all,--I prefer my vinegar _this_ way.
I’ve had all I’ve wanted to drink for a month, and it gets better
and better,--and, besides, I can drink a whole lot more than I could
at first, and it’s lots stronger, too. After a little I guess I can
drink as much as a big man and never feel it!’ and poor Joey stretched
himself to his greatest height, and strutted about the playhouse in an
exceedingly silly manner.”

“Why didn’t you tell Aunt Maggie?” asked Bertha. “I would have told my
mother, at least.”

“Perhaps you would, but I was a thoughtless child, and Joey was almost
the only playmate I had, and as I was very fond of play, I suppose I
kept quiet from a selfish fear that I might be forbidden his company
entirely.”




OLD JOE, THE DRUNKARD

PART FOUR


[Illustration]

It doesn’t seem possible,--I declare it doesn’t!” exclaimed Henri,
“that anybody could ever have cared to be near that horrid old
man,--least of all, our nice, sweet grandma.”

“But you must not forget that he was not _always horrid_. He was as
fair and bright then, as you are, Max. And I tell you, my children,
if you are ever led to follow in his steps, and form the appetite
for strong drink which he did, you would not be one whit better in
appearance or condition in a few years than old Joe is to-day. It may
well make you shudder, my boy, but I tell you the truth, and I only
hope you will keep the object lesson which you have learned to-day
always before you.

“I did not dream, at this time, any more than poor Joe, what this would
lead to.

“A few days after this,” continued grandma, “his aunt sent him to our
house to do an errand for her, and told him he might stay half an hour.
After a little, while we were quietly playing, I noticed that Joey
began acting strangely. When he tried to talk, his tongue seemed thick,
and his eyes were red and dull.

“‘What’s the matter, Joey?’ I asked, in real alarm, for I had never
seen any one act so before.

“‘Nothin’ smatter. Little too much Aunt Magsh shider. Bezzer go home
now,’ and poor Joe walked unsteadily down the lane to the road. But
even then it did not occur to me that my little playmate was actually
a trifle drunk. I only thought he was trying to plague me, or was
possibly a little sick, so I didn’t mention it. But the very next week
I was sent to Aunt Maggie’s to borrow a pattern. When I asked for Joey,
she said she guessed he was around somewhere, she didn’t know where,
she hadn’t seen him all the morning.

“Of course, I scampered off to find him, for I wanted to spend the
precious hour that mother had allotted me in which to play with Joey,
in repairing our latest playhouse.

[Illustration: “_Bezzer go home now_”]

“‘Joey! Joey!’ I called. ‘Come quick! For I can’t stay very long. Come
and let’s mend the playhouse!’

“But there was no answer. I called again and again. It took me a
long time to find him, but at last, just as I was getting a little
frightened, I turned around a corner of the old barn, and there,
leaning against the corncrib, with his round face quite white, was
Master Joey, sucking away bravely on an old clay pipe which we had
often used to blow soap bubbles with.

“The smell of the tobacco smoke was quite strong, so I knew at once
what my poor young friend was attempting to do. I had heard my father
say that smoking was a very bad habit, and the smell of the nasty stuff
made me feel sick, myself, for I was not accustomed to it.

“When Joe saw that he was fairly caught, he tried to put on an air of
great importance, and began stuffing more of the vile tobacco into his
pipe; but I could see that his hand trembled so that he could hardly
hold the pipe.

[Illustration: “_His round face quite white_”]

“‘Why, Joe Brandon!’ I exclaimed, now fairly aroused. ‘I’ll tell Aunt
Maggie, there now,--I declare, I will!’ and I started toward the house.

“‘Come back, I tell you! I wouldn’t be a little telltale!’ shouted
Joey, though his voice sounded weak and strange. ‘You just march back
here, Miss Tattler, or I’ll never build you another playhouse as long
as I live, or play with you another minute. Every single time a fellow
wants to have a little fun, then you begin to threaten to tell Aunt
Maggie! As much as I’ve done for you,--and as many playhouses as I’ve
made for you! Never you mind, Miss Tattler, it’s the last--the very
last!’

“My children, I am ashamed to say I hung my head and slowly sauntered
back; but I felt guilty.

“Joe tried to laugh boisterously, as he saw me coming back, and though
he was really a kind-hearted boy, he began to mock me, and threatened
to tell my mother that I had stolen the tobacco from the grocery for
him.

“‘But you know that isn’t true, Joe Brandon!’ I protested with
trembling voice, for it was the first quarrel we had ever had.

“‘I’m no sissy boy, I’ll have you understand, Miss Jennie Brown! Lots
of the best and richest men in town smoke. Even the new minister smokes
cigars, for I saw him, and I’m going to smoke, too. It’s no worse for
me than it is for them. So there! I guess you’ll hold your tongue now,
Miss Jennie Brown!’”

“Why, grandma!” exclaimed Henri; “he was surely very impolite, for a
boy who was trying so hard to be a man. He deserved a good flogging;
if I’d been there, I never would have allowed him to speak like that
to my grandma.”

“Surely Joe must have been a bad boy. Did he ever talk to you like that
before?” asked Bertha, whose face had grown very red.

“O no, Bertha; but you see one cannot expect much from a glutton or an
intemperate person. And poor Joe had been a glutton so long and had
taxed his weak stomach so many years with rich food, and stimulating
tea and coffee, pepper and spices, that all this began to be felt in
his nervous system, and led to all sorts of evil; until, when he was
only ten years old, he had such a craving for something strong and
exciting that he began learning the tobacco habit. The Bible says truly
that none can bring a clean thing out of an unclean. So, how could
sweet and gentle words come from lips through which passed so much
calculated to destroy and break down the body and ruin the nervous
system?”

“Did Aunt Maggie find it out at last?” questioned Max.

“O yes; I will tell you about it; finally after Joe had smoked his pipe
out, I said to him, ‘come, now; my hour is almost up, and I’ve been
waiting for you all this time. I hope you are ready to come with me now
and fix our new playhouse.’ Then I turned to look at Joe. I tell you,
children, I _was_ frightened this time and no mistake. The poor lad’s
eyes were turned up and rolling wildly in their sockets. His cheeks
were as white as marble and his lips were purple and drawn; his hands
were clenched, and he rolled down like a log by the side of the straw
stack. Still he groaned, ‘don’t you tell Aunt Maggie--no, no!’

[Illustration: “_He’ll die, won’t he?_”]

“‘I must! I must! I guess you are going to die, Joey, I must call her!
I can’t let you die here, all alone!’ But all poor Joe could do was
just to curl up in a heap, and snarl, ‘Tattle, tattle!’ between groans.

“I was just deciding to run home and leave him to his fate, for surely
I thought him dying, when I looked up, and there stood Aunt Maggie. She
took in the situation at a glance. She had begun to worry about Joe’s
being gone so long, and had started out to find us.

“There, by the side of the sick and spueing lad, lay the old pipe,
the cause of all the mischief. The good lady was terribly disgusted,
besides being considerably frightened. For a moment she did not speak,
though her lips trembled; I was the first to scream:--

“‘O Aunt Maggie! he’ll die, won’t he?’

“‘Die?--No; but may be it would be better in the end if he should,
before he breaks all our hearts.’

“Aunt Maggie was large and strong, and I had always thought her too
stouthearted to cry, but something very much like a sob broke from her
trembling lips, as she said, not unkindly, kneeling by the side of the
sick boy, and putting his damp head in her motherly arms:--

“‘Joe, lad, I’ve been _thinking_ all wasn’t right with you of late.
I’ve been missing the hard cider in the cellar, and I’ve thought you
acted strange. No wonder. Now, Joe, if this doesn’t kill you, you must
stop it at once. Where did you get the stuff?’

“‘I’ll not tell you! I’ll die first!’ groaned Joe.

“That’s all I heard,” continued grandma, “for I turned on my heel,
and ran just as fast as my little feet could fly, nor stopped until I
reached home, a very frightened and a very breathless little girl.”

[Illustration]




OLD JOE, THE DRUNKARD

PART FIVE


[Illustration]

But Aunt Maggie insisted upon knowing where Joe got the tobacco,”
said grandma, “and how he obtained the money for buying it; for she
found some of the nasty stuff hidden away in his room that same day.
So, at supper, she again asked him to tell her the truth, and begged
him to hide nothing from her. Aunt Maggie told my mother all about it
afterward. She said that Joey had been doing errands for the grocer,
Mr. Green, for some time, and that he had never brought home any money,
and that now Joey declared that he had taken his pay in tobacco,
because Mr. Green refused to pay him in any other way.”

“That wasn’t true, I dare say,” reflected Max. “Was it, grandmother?”

“No, indeed. When Mr. Green found out about it, he said that he had
paid the boy the money for all that he had done, and that he had not
only not given him any tobacco, but that he did not keep it for sale
at all in his shop. He said that as he knew it to be harmful, he had
decided not to sell the stuff. So poor Aunt Maggie saw at once that
Joey had added to his other sins, those of falsehood and deceit.”

“Why, grandma,” ventured Bertha, “I should think you would not have
wanted to play with him any more, when you saw what a bad, deceitful
boy he was.”

“No, I did not play with him any more. My father at once forbade that,
and in a few weeks Aunt Maggie moved away. Of course, I missed my old
playfellow, but I did not see him again in a long time,” continued
grandma. “My mother saw Aunt Maggie after they had been gone about a
year, and mother said that she never saw such a sad change in any one
before. The poor old lady’s hair had grown quite white, and her face
was pale and careworn.”

“I dare say that bad, ungrateful boy vexed her so that she had no
peace,” continued Bertha.

“Yes, yes,” sighed grandma, “my mother said there were tears in Aunt
Maggie’s eyes as she told her that poor Joe was going to ruin as fast
as he could, and that already she found it quite impossible to control
him.

“Finally, one day about three or four years after this, my father had
occasion to pass through the town where Joey lived, and I went with
him. I rather hoped we would not see Joe, for I knew that the meeting
would be only painful; for you will remember that by this time I had
grown to be a large girl,--quite a young lady, in fact, and Joe was a
year older.”

“Did Joe know you were coming?” asked Henri.

“O, no, or surely I do not think I should have found him in the place
where he was.”

“Maybe he wouldn’t have cared after all,” ventured Max.

“O, yes, he would, I am sure; for he was naturally a very proud lad,
fond of show, and always anxious to make a good impression upon his
friends. But you see, he didn’t know we were coming, and so as father
and I were passing the door of one of the many saloons which cursed
the little town, there stood my old playfellow, among a crowd of young
toughs, just in the act of lighting his pipe, and taking dreadful
lessons in beer drinking and profanity. O you can’t think how badly I
felt.”

“What did he say then, grandma? Wasn’t he very much ashamed?” asked
Bertha.

“Perhaps so. He stood close outside, by the door, and I called to him
just as he was stepping inside. At first he pretended not to hear me,
but it seemed to me that I could not let him enter that awful place;
and so I ventured to call his name once more, louder than before. He
could hardly refuse, then, to come back and speak to me. Just as he did
so, an old man came out, staggering and spueing as he came. The man
was quite well dressed, for this was one of the better saloons; but
the poor man’s face was red and bloated and looked much like old Joe’s
to-day.

“I could see that my young friend was considerably ashamed, but he
tried by falsehood and deceit, and by putting on a bold front, to
excuse the fact of his being in such a place.

“‘Fact is, Mr. Brown,’ he said, addressing my father, ‘I was in there
just doing an errand for Aunt Maggie. She wanted some alcohol for her
camphor, and of course, _she_ wouldn’t go, so she coaxed me. I don’t
like these rough fellows, myself, Jennie,’ he continued blandly. ‘You
know I never did. Didn’t we have some jolly times in the old days
though?’ and I fancied,” continued grandma, “that I could see a shade
of real regret in his expressive brown eyes. O I felt so sorry for him!

“‘Poor Joe!’ I said, ‘Aunt Maggie might a great deal better have gone
without her camphor, than to send you into a saloon among those awful
spueing men. Really, Joey,’ I questioned in an undertone, ‘did Aunt
Maggie actually and truly send you?’

“‘O you’re just like you used to be, Jennie,’ said he, laughing
lightly, but I could see that my question made him wince. ‘Of course
she sent me, I have to mind Aunt Maggie, don’t you see?’

“Finally, before I left him, I had made him promise solemnly that he
would keep away from the saloons and never touch another glass of beer
as long as he lived.”

“Then he owned up, did he?” questioned Max.

“Yes, for he must have known on second thought, that his wretched
falsehood about Aunt Maggie’s sending him into a saloon was too
foolish to be believed.”

“Well, anyway,” sighed Bertha, “the poor boy didn’t keep his promise to
you, grandma, or we would not have seen him in the gutter to-day.”

“O no, my dear; but it was all I could do, and perhaps it did affect
him for good for a little while; for though he was weak and foolish and
had, by this time, acquired a great love for the fatal cup, yet he had
great respect for my father, and also entertained a strong feeling of
friendship for me. Still, it took me some time to get him to make the
promise.

[Illustration: “_I’ll promise, of course._”]

“‘You’re asking a great deal of me, Jennie,’ he said, ‘seems to me
you’re pretty hard on a fellow, but I’ll promise, of course. Though you
ought to know me well enough to be perfectly assured that I would have
too much sense to drink enough to do me any harm. Just a social glass
now and again,--that’s all,--couldn’t possibly do me a bit of harm. I
flatter myself I’m too much of a gentleman not to know enough to quit
when I’ve had plenty. Of course some people can’t do it, but I am my
father’s son, Miss Jennie, and they say that he was a gentleman!’ and
the poor, misguided lad straightened himself very proudly and glanced
at my father as though hoping he would approve his logic.”

“What did your father say, grandma,” queried Henri.

“He only smiled sadly at the self-conceited young lad and said:--

“‘I used to know and love your father, Joe, he was a true gentleman,
and one of my dearest friends,--indeed, he was too much of a gentleman
to allow anything that could intoxicate to pass his lips. I only wish
you would follow in his steps.’

“This sort of thing was not to Joe’s liking one bit,” continued grandma,
“and he soon made an excuse to part company from us. He turned down
another street, and it was nearly five years before I saw him again.
Meanwhile, his heartbroken aunt, who had been to him both father and
mother, was doing all in her power to save him.

“‘I can’t imagine whom the boy takes after,’ she often said to
my mother. ‘None of his people ever drank, and his father was a
gentleman.’” But the poor woman did not realize that he had formed the
love for strong drink right at home in her own pantry and cellar.




OLD JOE, THE DRUNKARD

PART SIX


[Illustration]

As I said, it was almost five years before I saw Joe Brandon again.
He was then a young man of very fascinating manners, handsome, and
attractive. But he was already becoming so idle and vicious that no one
dared trust him, and although his face was handsome, his follies and
intemperate habits had stamped themselves upon it, until they had given
him a certain reckless air that was far from agreeable,--still--”

“O grandma!” interrupted Bertha, with an expression of incredulity, “it
can’t be possible that old Joe ever had a grain of good looks. Why! his
face is actually hideous and disgusting, and so bloated that I could
scarcely see his eyes; and, grandma, it was horrible, horrible! his
long, yellow beard was covered with vomit, and--O grandma! how _could_
he ever have been attractive?” and Bertha shuddered.

“I tell you, my dear,” explained grandma, “there is nothing on earth
that is so brutalizing and degrading in its effect upon the human
system as strong drink. It is the devil’s own weapon, and with it, he
succeeds too often in bringing his poor, duped victims far below the
level of the brutes.

“About this time Joe became acquainted with a beautiful young girl, the
daughter of a merchant who lived in the city, where Joe now had his
home.

“Meanwhile, good Aunt Maggie had died, leaving Joe the little remnant
of property which she had. This was soon spent, of course, in folly and
dissipation by the poor prodigal.”

“But tell me about the pretty young girl,” persuaded Bertha.

“Her name was Martha Grey,” replied grandma, “and all too soon the
reckless and dissipated young man succeeded in winning her heart, for,
as I told you, he was handsome and kind-hearted; although he possessed
a high opinion of his own good looks and capabilities.

“He had attended school a good deal, and was no mean student, and after
a time he began the study of law. He might have succeeded well in this,
his chosen profession, had he been diligent and persevering; but his
old enemy, _appetite_, was constantly upon his track, and it was not
long before he lost his practice, because nobody wanted to employ a
drunken lawyer. After he had been seen reeling down the street a few
times, he soon found himself without clients.”

“But, grandma,” protested Bertha, “I don’t see how he could have kept
all this hidden from poor Martha Grey.”

“Ah, he could not,--though he tried hard enough to do so, for Mr. Grey,
Martha’s father, was very much opposed to strong drink. But one day Joe
so far forgot himself as to enter Mr. Grey’s store quite intoxicated.
Of course, the merchant was very much displeased and disgusted, and
forbade the young man ever to visit his daughter again. Still, I am
sorry to say, Martha insisted upon meeting Joe, and still accepted his
company.”

[Illustration: “_He entered Mr. Grey’s store quite intoxicated._”]

“Why didn’t you go and talk with her, grandma?” suggested Henri, “maybe
you could have persuaded her, even if her father could not; she must
have been a silly young lady, I’m sure.”

“O my dear boy!” exclaimed grandma. “If you had known Martha Grey, you
could not have said that. No; she was a beautiful girl, but a most
mistaken one,” and grandma sighed. “I went to visit her, myself, many
times, and most earnestly did I try to persuade her to quit the company
of this reckless and dissipated young man. Poor Martha’s face would
turn very pale as I talked with her, but her voice was low and decided
as she replied:--

“‘I know you think him very bad, dear friend, but poor Joseph is not
altogether so, and he has promised me to quit his cups entirely, and
I am sure he will. I think it is my mission to make a good man of
Joe,--to reform him, in fact, and I believe I can do it, at least, I
mean to try.’ So in spite of all that I could do, and in spite of the
efforts of her father, and many interested friends, she ran away from
home and married the poor drunkard.”

[Illustration: “_I think it is my mission to make a good man of Joe._”]

“Didn’t Joe behave himself any better then?” asked Henri.

“Better?--no, no; and from that moment, the fate of the poor, mistaken
girl was sealed. To be sure, her wretched husband would have periods of
repenting, and spend days and nights of misery and remorse, but the
demon which he had entertained and fed so many long years was not to be
easily banished.”

“Did Mr. Grey ever forgive his daughter and take her home again?”
queried Bertha, her blue eyes full of tears, “O, I hope so, grandma.”

“Mr. Grey was a kind father, and he loved his daughter very tenderly.
So, after a while he went to see Joe, and invited him to take a
position as clerk in his store. The poor fellow was only too glad to
accept the kind offer, and promised most faithfully to reform. Of
course, his devoted wife was much encouraged, and for a time all went
well.

“But, my children,” continued grandma, “there is nothing but the power
of Christ, which can lay hold of the victim of rum, and stand him upon
his feet and keep him from falling. But for this wonderful power, poor
Joe had never asked.

“Still he struggled in his own strength,--struggled most pitifully,
to break the strong bands which bound him,--struggled vainly as poor
Samson did when he was shorn of his strength. But it was only a few
weeks before poor Joe had fallen again. Some of his old companions,
jealous of his success and altered circumstances, determined to compass
his ruin.

“‘Come in, Joe, man, come in and take a glass with your old friends,’
they called one day as he was passing a saloon where he had so lately
been a drunken idler. Joe had not the courage to refuse, for there
was nothing so dreaded by him as to have it said that he was tied to a
woman’s apron string.”

“O, I’m so sorry!” exclaimed Bertha, for she was a very sympathetic
little girl. “Of course, the foolish man went into the saloon.”

“Indeed, he did, and when he came out again, his drunken legs would
scarcely carry him home.”

[Illustration: “_Of course, the foolish man went into the saloon._”]

“Did his father-in-law send him away now? I’m very sure I should,”
reflected Max stoutly. “I would not have a drunken man about.”

“I am glad to know that you hate strong drink, my lad,” replied
grandma, placing her hand kindly upon his head, “but we must none of
us forget that Christ died for _all_, even the poor drunkard, and we
should pity, and do all we can for him. Yes, Mr. Grey forgave him and
took him back, not only this time, but many times afterward, until
finally after a few years, his poor wife, beautiful Martha Grey, died
heartbroken and wretched.

“Then Joe went away, and after a time he went to sea. Finally, after
many years, he became the wretched, drunken outcast whom you saw to-day.

“Now children, I have told you the story of poor old Joe, and I want
you to learn this verse, which is one of the proverbs of Solomon, the
wise man:--

“‘For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty; and
drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags.’”

[Illustration: _LITTLE JOEY_

_OLD JOE_

_THE BEGINNING AND THE ENDING_]




EFFECTS OF STIMULANTS

BY MRS. E. G. WHITE


[Illustration]

Know you not that they which run a race run all, but one receiveth the
prize? So run, that you may obtain. And every man that striveth for
the mastery is temperate in all things. Now they do it to obtain a
corruptible crown; but we an incorruptible.”

Here the good results of self control and temperate habits are set
forth. The various games instituted among the ancient Greeks in
honor of their gods, are presented before us by the apostle Paul to
illustrate the spiritual warfare and its reward. Those who were to
participate in these games were trained by the most severe discipline.
Every indulgence that would tend to weaken the physical powers was
forbidden. Luxurious food and wine were prohibited, in order to promote
physical vigor, fortitude, and firmness.

To win the prize for which they strove,--a chaplet of perishable
flowers, bestowed amid the applause of the multitude,--was considered
the highest honor. If so much could be endured, so much self-denial
practised, in the hope of gaining so worthless a prize, which only
one at best could obtain, how much greater should be the sacrifice,
how much greater should be the sacrifice, how much more willing the
self-denial, for an incorruptible crown, and for everlasting life!

[Illustration: _Daniel and His Fellows Refusing the King’s Meat_]

There is work for us to do--stern, earnest work. All our habits,
tastes, and inclinations must be educated in harmony with the laws of
life and health. By this means we may secure the very best physical
conditions, and have mental clearness to discern between the evil and
the good.

In order rightly to understand the subject of temperance, we must
consider it from a Bible standpoint; and nowhere can we find a more
comprehensive and forcible illustration of true temperance and its
attendant blessings, than is afforded by the history of the prophet
Daniel and his Hebrew associates in the court of Babylon.

When these youth were selected to be educated in the “learning and the
tongue of the Chaldeans,” that they might “stand in the king’s palace,”
there was appointed them a daily allowance from the king’s table, both
of food and wine. “But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not
defile himself with the portion of the king’s meat, nor with the wine
which he drank.”

The food appointed them would include meats pronounced unclean by
the law of Moses. They requested the officer who had them in charge
to give them a more simple fare; but he hesitated, fearing that
such rigid abstinence as they proposed would affect their personal
appearance unfavorably, and bring himself into disfavor with the king.
Daniel pleaded for a ten days’ trial. This was granted, and at the
expiration of that time these youth were found to be far more healthy
in appearance than those who had partaken of the king’s dainties.
Hence the simple pulse and water which they at first requested, was
thereafter the food of Daniel and his companions.

It was not their own pride or ambition that brought these young men
into the king’s court,--into the companionship of those who neither
knew nor feared the true God. They were captives in a strange land, and
Infinite Wisdom had placed them there. At this trial of their loyalty,
they considered their position, with its dangers and difficulties, and
then in the fear of God made their decision. Even at the risk of the
king’s displeasure, they would be true to the religion of their fathers.

They obeyed the divine law, both physical and moral, and the blessing
of God gave them strength and comeliness and intellectual power.

These youth had received a right education in early life, and now, when
separated from home influences and sacred associations, they honored
the instructors of their childhood. With their habits of self-denial
were coupled earnestness of purpose, diligence, and steadfastness. They
were not actuated by pride or unworthy ambition; but sought to acquit
themselves creditably, for the honor of their down-trodden people, and
for His glory whose servants they were.

When the ability and acquirements of these youth were tested by the
king at the end of the three years of training, none were found like
unto Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah. Their keen apprehension,
their choice and exact language, their extensive and varied knowledge,
testified to the unimpaired strength and vigor of their mental powers.
Therefore they stood before the king. “And in all matters of wisdom and
understanding, that the king enquired of them, he found them ten times
better than all the magicians and astrologers that were in all his
realm.”

God always honors the right. The most promising youth from all the
lands subdued by the great conqueror had been gathered at Babylon, yet
amid them all, the Hebrew captives were without a rival. The erect
form, the firm, elastic step, the fair countenance, the undimmed
senses, the untainted breath,--all were so many certificates of good
habits,--insignia of the nobility with which nature honors those who
are obedient to her laws.

The history of Daniel and his companions has been recorded on the pages
of the inspired word, for the benefit of the youth of all succeeding
ages. What men have done, men may do. Did those youthful Hebrews stand
firm amid great temptations, and bear a noble testimony in favor of
true temperance?--the youth of to-day may bear a similar testimony.

The lesson here presented is one which we would do well to ponder. Our
danger is not from scarcity, but from abundance. We are constantly
tempted to excess. Those who would preserve their powers unimpaired
for the service of God, must observe strict temperance in the use of
His bounties, as well as total abstinence from every injurious or
debasing indulgence.

The rising generation are surrounded by allurements calculated to tempt
the appetite. Especially in our large cities, every form of indulgence
is made easy and inviting. Those who, like Daniel, refuse to defile
themselves, will reap the reward of their temperate habits. With their
greater physical stamina and increased power of endurance, they have a
bank of deposit on which to draw in case of emergency.

Right physical habits promote mental superiority. Intellectual power,
physical strength, and longevity depend upon immutable laws. There
is no happen-so, no chance, about this matter. Nature’s God will not
interfere to preserve men from the consequences of violating nature’s
laws. There is much sterling truth in the adage, “Every man is the
architect of his own fortune.” While parents are responsible for the
stamp of character, as well as for the education and training, of their
sons and daughters, it is still true that our position and usefulness
in the world depend, to a great degree, upon our own course of action.
Daniel and his companions enjoyed the benefits of correct training
and education in early life, but these advantages alone would not
have made them what they were. The time came when they must act for
themselves,--when their future depended upon their own course. Then
they decided to be true to the lessons given them in childhood. The
fear of God, which is the beginning of wisdom, was the foundation of
their greatness. His Spirit strengthened every true purpose, every
noble resolution.

Intemperance has cursed the world almost from its infancy. Noah’s son
was so debased by the excessive use of wine, that he lost all sense of
propriety, and the curse which followed his sin has never been lifted
from his descendants.

Nadab and Abihu were men in holy office; but by the use of wine, their
minds became so clouded that they could not distinguish between sacred
and common things. By the offering of “strange fire” they disregarded
God’s command, and were slain by His judgments.

Alexander found it much easier to subdue kingdoms than to rule his
own spirit. After conquering nations, this so-called great man fell,
through the indulgence of appetite--a victim of intemperance.

Notwithstanding thousands of years of experience and progress, the same
dark blot which stained the pages of history, remains to disfigure
our modern civilization. Drunkenness, with all its woes, is found
everywhere we go. In spite of the noble efforts of temperance workers,
the evil has gained ground. License laws have been enacted, but legal
regulation has not stayed its progress, except in comparatively limited
territory. Efforts have been made to establish institutions where the
victims of intemperance might receive help to overcome their terrible
appetite. This is a noble work, but how much wiser, how much more
effective, would have been the removal of the cause of all this woe!
Considering only the financial aspect of this question, what folly it
is to tolerate a business that is making paupers by the thousand! The
laws of the land legalize the trade of making drunkards, and then at
great expense, provide institutions for converting them again into
sober men! Can our legislators furnish no better solution of the liquor
question?

So long as the sale of liquor is sanctioned by law, the victims of
appetite can receive but little benefit through inebriate asylums.
They cannot remain there always; they must again take their place
in society. The appetite for intoxicating drinks, though it may be
subdued, is not wholly destroyed, and when temptation assails them, as
it must on every hand, they too often fall an easy prey.

What can be done to press back this inflowing tide of evil? Let laws
be enacted and rigidly enforced prohibiting the sale and use of ardent
spirits. Let every effort be made to encourage the inebriate’s return
to temperance and virtue. But even more than this is needed to banish
the curse of inebriety from our land. Let the appetite for intoxicating
liquors be removed, and the demand for them is at an end.

Only men of strict temperance and integrity should be admitted to our
legislative halls, or chosen to preside in our courts of justice.
Property, reputation, and even life itself, are insecure when left to
the judgment of men who are intemperate and immoral. How many innocent
persons have been condemned to death, how many more have been robbed
of all their earthly possessions, by the injustice of drinking jurors,
lawyers, witnesses, and even judges!

There is need now of men like Daniel, to do and dare. A pure heart and
a strong, fearless hand are wanted in the world to-day. God designed
that man should be constantly improving,--daily reaching a higher point
in the scale of excellence. He will help us, if we help ourselves. It
is the duty of every Christian to see that his example and influence
are on the side of reform. Let ministers of the gospel lift up their
voices like a trumpet, and show the people their transgression, and
the house of Israel their sins. The youth need to be instructed. Our
hope of happiness in two worlds depends upon our improvement of one.
We should be guarded at every point against the first approach to
intemperance. If we would preserve our children from evil, we must give
them a right example, and then teach them to make God their fear, their
wisdom, and their strength.

The use of intoxicating liquor dethrones reason, and hardens the heart
against every pure and holy influence. The inanimate rocks will sooner
listen to the appeals of truth and justice, than will that man whose
sensibilities are paralyzed by intemperance. Those who venture to
enter the forbidden path are gradually and unconsciously led on, until
they become demoralized, corrupted, and maddened. And while Christians
are asleep, this evil is gaining more strength and making fresh
victims. If the moral sensibilities of Christians were aroused upon the
subject of temperance in _all things_, and they realized that the final
destiny of every one depends upon the habits he forms, they could by
their example, help those who are weak in self-control to resist the
cravings of appetite.

We witness great struggles in our country to put down intemperance; but
it is a hard matter to overcome and chain a full-grown lion. If half
the efforts that have been put forth to stay this giant evil, had been
directed toward enlightening parents in regard to their responsibility
in forming the habits and character of their children, a thousand-fold
more good might have resulted. The unnatural appetite for spirituous
liquors is often created at home, in many cases at the tables of the
very ones who are most zealous to lead out in the temperance work. We
bid all workers Godspeed; but we invite them to look more deeply into
the cause of the evil they war against, and to be more thorough and
consistent in reform.

Through the intemperance begun at home, the digestive organs first
become weakened, and soon ordinary food does not satisfy the appetite.
Unhealthful conditions are established, and there is a craving for more
stimulating food. Tea and coffee produce an immediate effect. Under
the influence of these poisons the nervous system is excited, and in
some cases, for the time being, the intellect seems to be invigorated,
the imagination more vivid.

Because these stimulants produce such agreeable results, many conclude
that they really need them; but there is always a reaction. The nervous
system has borrowed power from its future resources, for present use,
and all this temporary invigoration is followed by corresponding
depression. The suddenness of the relief obtained from tea and
coffee, is an evidence that what seems to be strength is only nervous
excitement, and consequently must be an injury to the system.

The appetite thus educated continually to crave something stronger,
demands an increase of the agreeable excitement. Its demands become
more frequent, and more difficult to control. The more debilitated the
system and the less able to do without unnatural stimulus, the more the
desire for these things increases, until the will is overborne, and
there seems to be no power to deny the unnatural craving.

When there has been a departure from the right path, it is difficult to
return. Barriers have been broken down, safeguards removed. One step in
the wrong direction prepares the way for another. The least deviation
from right principles will lead to separation from God, and may end
in destruction. What we do once, we more readily do again; and to go
forward in a certain path, be it right or wrong, is more easy than
to start. To corrupt our ways before God requires no effort; but to
ingraft habits of righteousness and truth upon the character takes time
and patient endeavor.

Many who would hesitate to place liquor to a neighbor’s lips, will
engage in the raising of hops, and thus lend their influence against
the temperance cause. I cannot see how, in the light of the law of God,
Christians can conscientiously engage in the raising of hops or the
manufacture of wine and cider for the market.

I have often heard people say, “Oh! this is only sweet cider. It is
perfectly harmless, and even healthful.” Several quarts, perhaps
gallons, are carried home. For a short time it is sweet; then
fermentation begins. The sharp taste makes it all the more acceptable
to many palates, and the lover of sweet wine and cider is loath to
admit that his favorite beverage ever becomes hard and sour.

Intoxication is just as really produced by wine and cider as by
stronger drinks, and it is the worst kind of inebriation. The passions
are more perverse; the transformation of character is greater, more
determined, and obstinate. A few quarts of cider or wine may awaken
a taste for stronger drinks, and in many cases those who have become
confirmed drunkards have thus laid the foundation of the drinking habit.

For persons who have inherited an appetite for stimulants, it is by no
means safe to have wine or cider in the house; for Satan is continually
soliciting them to indulge. If they yield to his temptations, they
do not know where to stop; appetite clamors for indulgence, and is
gratified to their ruin. The brain is clouded; reason no longer holds
the reins, but lays them on the neck of lust. Licentiousness abounds,
and vices of almost every type are practiced as the result of indulging
the appetite for wine and cider. It is impossible for one who loves
these stimulants, and accustoms himself to their use, to grow in grace.
He becomes gross and sensual; the animal passions control the higher
powers of the mind, and virtue is not cherished.

Moderate drinking is the school in which men are receiving an education
for the drunkard’s career. So gradually does Satan lead away from the
strongholds of temperance, so insidiously do wine and cider exert their
influence upon the taste, that the highway to drunkenness is entered
upon all unsuspectingly. The taste for stimulants is cultivated;
the nervous system is disordered; Satan keeps the mind in a fever
of unrest, and the poor victim, imagining himself perfectly secure,
goes on and on, until every barrier is broken down, every principle
sacrificed. The strongest resolutions are undermined, and eternal
interests are too weak to keep the debased appetite under the control
of reason. Some are never really drunk, but are always under the
influence of mild intoxicants. They are feverish, unstable in mind, not
really delirious, but as truly unbalanced; for the nobler powers of the
mind are perverted.

Wherever we go, we encounter the tobacco devotee, enfeebling both
mind and body by his darling indulgence. Have men a right to deprive
their Maker and the world of the service which is their due? Tobacco
is a slow; insidious poison. Its effects are more difficult to erase
from the system than are those of liquor. It binds the victim in even
stronger bands of slavery than does the intoxicating cup. It is a
disgusting habit, defiling to the user, and very annoying to others. We
rarely pass through a crowd, but men will puff their poisoned breath in
our faces. It is unpleasant, if not dangerous, to remain in a railway
car or in a room where the atmosphere is impregnated with the fumes of
liquor and tobacco. Is it honorable thus to contaminate the air which
others must breath?

What power can the tobacco devotee have to stay the progress of
intemperance? There must be a revolution upon the subject of tobacco
before the ax will be laid at the root of the tree. Tea, coffee, and
tobacco, as well as alcoholic drinks, are different degrees in the
scale of artificial stimulants.

The effect of tea and coffee, as heretofore shown, tends in the same
direction as that of wine and cider, liquor and tobacco.

Tea is a stimulant, and to a certain extent produces intoxication. It
gradually impairs the energy of body and mind. Its first effect is
exhilarating, because it quickens the motions of the living machinery;
and the tea drinker thinks that it is doing him great service. But this
is a mistake. When its influence is gone, the unnatural force abates,
and the result is languor and debility corresponding to the artificial
vivacity imparted. The second effect of tea drinking is headache,
wakefulness, palpitation of the heart, indigestion, trembling, and many
other evils.

Coffee is a hurtful indulgence. It temporarily excites the mind to
unwonted action, but the after-effect is exhaustion, prostration,
paralysis of the mental, moral, and physical powers. The mind becomes
enervated, and unless through determined effort the habit is overcome,
the activity of the brain is permanently lessened.

All these nerve irritants are wearing away the life forces, and the
restlessness caused by shattered nerves, the impatience, the mental
feebleness, become warring elements, antagonizing to spiritual
progress. Then should not those who advocate temperance and reform be
awake to counteract the evils of these injurious drinks? In some cases
it is as difficult to break up the tea-and-coffee habit as it is for
the inebriate to discontinue the use of liquor. The money expended for
tea and coffee is worse than wasted. They do the user only harm, and
that continually. Those who use tea, coffee, opium, and alcohol, may
sometimes live to old age, but this fact is no argument in favor of the
use of these stimulants. What these persons might have accomplished,
but failed to, because of their intemperate habits, the great day of
God alone will reveal.

Those who resort to tea and coffee for stimulation to labor, will
feel the evil effects of this course in trembling nerves and lack of
self-control. Tired nerves need rest and quiet. Nature needs time to
recuperate her exhausted energies. But if her forces are goaded on by
the use of stimulants, there is, whenever this process is repeated, a
lessening of real force. For a time, more may be accomplished under the
unnatural stimulus, but gradually it becomes more difficult to rouse
the energies to the desired point, and at last exhausted nature can no
longer respond.

The habit of drinking coffee and tea is a greater evil than is
often suspected. Many who have accustomed themselves to the use of
stimulating drinks, suffer from headache and nervous prostration, and
lose much time on account of sickness. They imagine they cannot live
without the stimulus, and are ignorant of its effect upon the health.
What makes it more dangerous is, that its evil effects are so often
attributed to other causes.

Through the use of stimulants, the whole system suffers. The nerves
are unbalanced, the liver is morbid in its action, the quality and
circulation of the blood are affected, and the skin becomes inactive
and sallow. The mind, too, is injured. The immediate influence of these
stimulants is to excite the brain to undue activity, only to leave it
weaker and less capable of exertion. The after-effect is prostration,
not only mental and physical, but moral. As a result we see nervous
men and women, of unsound judgment and unbalanced mind. They often
manifest a hasty, impatient, accusing spirit, viewing the faults of
others as through a magnifying glass, and utterly unable to discern
their own defects.

When these tea and coffee users meet together for social entertainment,
the effects of their pernicious habit are manifest. All partake freely
of the favorite beverages, and as the stimulating influence is felt,
their tongues are loosened, and they begin the wicked work of talking
against others. Their words are not few or well chosen. The tidbits
of gossip are passed around, too often the poison of scandal as well.
These thoughtless gossipers forget that they have a witness. An unseen
Watcher is writing their words in the books of heaven. All these
unkind criticisms, these exaggerated reports, these envious feelings,
expressed under the excitement of the cup of tea, Jesus registers as
against Himself. “Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of
these my brethren, ye have done it unto Me.”

We are already suffering because of the wrong habits of our fathers,
and yet how many take a course in every way worse than theirs! Opium,
tea, coffee, tobacco, and liquor are rapidly extinguishing the spark
of vitality still left in the race. Every year millions of gallons of
intoxicating liquors are drank, and millions of dollars are spent for
tobacco. And the slaves of appetite, while constantly spending their
earnings in sensual indulgence, rob their children of food and clothing
and the advantages of education. There can never be a right state of
society while these evils exist.

[Illustration: _Tea Table Gossips_]

When the appetite for spirituous liquor is indulged, the man
voluntarily places to his lips the draught which debases below the
level of the brute, him who was made in the image of God. Reason is
paralyzed, the intellect is benumbed, the animal passion is excited,
and then follow crimes of the most debasing character. How can the user
of rum and tobacco give to God an undivided heart?--It is impossible.
Neither can he love his neighbor as himself. The darling indulgence
engrosses all his affections. To gratify his craving for strong drink,
he sells reason and self-control. He places to his lips that which
stupefies the brain, paralyzes the intellect, and makes him a shame and
a curse to his family, and a terror to all around him. If men would
become temperate in all things, if they would touch not, taste not,
handle not, tea, coffee, tobacco, wines, opium, and alcoholic drinks,
reason would take the reins of government in her own hands, and hold
the appetite and passions under control.

Through appetite, Satan controls the mind and the whole being.
Thousands who might have lived have passed to the grave, physical,
mental, and moral wrecks, because they sacrificed all their powers
to the indulgence of appetite. The necessity for the men of this
generation to call to their aid the power of the will, strengthened
by the grace of God, in order to withstand the temptations of Satan,
and resist the least indulgence of perverted appetite, is far greater
than it was several generations ago. But the present generation have
less power of self-control than had those who lived then. Those who
indulged in these stimulants transmitted their depraved appetites and
passions to their children, and greater moral power is now required to
resist intemperance in all its forms. The only perfectly safe course
is to stand firm, observing strict temperance in all things, and never
venturing into the path of danger.

I feel an intense interest that fathers and mothers should realize the
solemn obligations that are resting upon them at this time. We are
bringing up children who will be controlled by the power of Satan or
by that of Christ. The only way in which any can be secure against the
power of intemperance, is to abstain wholly from wine, beer, and strong
drinks. We must teach our children that in order to be manly, they
must let these things alone. God has shown us what constitutes true
manliness. It is he that overcometh who will be honored, and whose name
will not be blotted out of the book of life.

When the Lord would raise up Samson as a deliverer of His people, He
enjoined upon the mother correct habits of life before the birth of her
child. And the same prohibition was to be imposed, from the first, upon
the child; for he was to be consecrated to God as a Nazarite from his
birth.

The angel of God appeared to the wife of Manoah, and informed her that
she should have a son; and in view of this, he gave her the important
directions: “Now therefore beware, I pray thee, and drink not wine nor
strong drink, and eat not any unclean thing.”

God had important work for the promised child of Manoah to do, and it
was to secure for him the qualifications necessary for this work, that
the habits of both the mother and the child were to be so carefully
regulated. “Neither let her drink wine nor strong drink,” was the
angel’s instruction for the wife of Manoah, “nor eat any unclean thing:
all that I commanded her let her observe.” The child will be affected
for good or evil by the habits of the mother. She must herself be
controlled by principle, and must practice temperance and self-denial,
if she would seek the welfare of her child.

In the New Testament we find a no less impressive example of the
importance of temperate habits.

John the Baptist was a reformer. To him was committed a great work
for the people of his time. And in preparation for that work, all his
habits were carefully regulated, even from his birth. The angel Gabriel
was sent from heaven to instruct the parents of John in the principles
of health reform. He “shall drink neither wine nor strong drink,” said
the heavenly messenger; “and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost.”

John separated himself from his friends, and from the luxuries of
life, dwelling alone in the wilderness, and subsisting on a purely
vegetable diet. The simplicity of his dress--a garment woven of camel’s
hair--was a rebuke to the extravagance and display of the people of his
generation, especially of the Jewish priests. His diet also, of locusts
and wild honey, was a rebuke to the gluttony that everywhere prevailed.

[Illustration: _1 Samuel Presented to Eli_

_2 Samson and the Gate of Gaza_

_3 John the Baptist in the Wilderness_]

The work of John was foretold by the prophet Malachi: “Behold, I will
send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful
day of the Lord; and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the
children, and the heart of the children to their fathers.” John the
Baptist went forth in the spirit and power of Elijah, to prepare the
way of the Lord, and to turn the people to the wisdom of the just. He
was a representative of those living in the last days, to whom God
has entrusted sacred truths to present before the people, to prepare
the way for the second coming of Christ. And the same principles of
temperance which John practiced should be observed by those who in our
day are to warn the world of the coming of the Son of man.

God has made man in His own image, and He expects man to preserve
unimpaired the powers that have been imparted to him for the Creator’s
service. Then should we not heed His admonitions, and seek to preserve
every power in the best condition to serve him? The very best we can
give to God is feeble enough.

Why is there so much misery in the world to-day? Is it because God
loves to see His creatures suffer?--O no! it is because men become
weakened by immoral practices. We mourn over Adam’s transgression, and
seem to think that our first parents showed great weakness in yielding
to temptation; but if Adam’s transgression were the only evil we had to
meet, the condition of the world would be much better than it is. There
has been a succession of falls since Adam’s day.

Indulgence in spirituous liquors is causing great wretchedness in the
world. Though liquor drinkers are told again and again that they are
shortening their life, they still go on in transgression. Why not cease
to break the laws of God? Why not seek to preserve themselves in a
condition of health? This is what God requires of them. If Christians
would bring all their appetites and passions under the control of
enlightened conscience, feeling it a duty they owe to God and to their
neighbor to obey the laws which govern life and health, they would have
the blessing of physical and mental vigor; they would have moral power
to engage in the warfare against Satan; and in the name of Him who
conquered in their behalf, they might be more than conquerors on their
own account.

All around us are the victims of depraved appetite, and what are you
going to do for them? Can you not, by your example, help them to place
their feet in the path of temperance? Can you have a sense of the
temptations that are coming upon the youth who are growing up around
us, and not seek to warn and save them? Who will stand on the Lord’s
side? Who will help to press back this tide of immorality, of woe,
and wretchedness, that is filling the world? We entreat of you to
turn your attention to the work of overcoming. Those who shall at last
have a right to the tree of life, will be those who have kept God’s
commandments.

It is not an easy matter to overcome the appetite for narcotics and
stimulants. But in the name of Christ this great victory can be gained.
His love for the fallen race was so great that He made an infinite
sacrifice to reach them in their degradation and through His divine
power finally elevate them to His throne. But it rests with man whether
Christ shall accomplish for him that which He is fully able to do. God
cannot work against man’s will to save him from Satan’s artifices. Man
must put forth his human power to resist and conquer at any cost; he
must be a co-worker with Christ. Then, through the victory that it is
his privilege to gain by the all-powerful name of Jesus, he may become
an heir of God, and a partaker with Christ of His glory. No drunkard
can inherit the kingdom of God; but “to him that overcometh will I
grant to sit with Me in My throne, even as I also overcame, and am set
down with My Father in His throne.”




UNCLE BEN’S STORY


I have a good mind to tell you a story,” said Uncle Ben, drawing
his chair a little nearer the smiling group of young people which
surrounded the table in the sitting room.

“Do, Uncle Ben,” they replied.

As Uncle Ben announced his intention of telling a story, all eyes were
turned upon him. Mother laid aside her book and spectacles, and father
leaned back in his easy chair to listen, for Uncle Ben’s stories were
always worth hearing.

As uncle spoke, we wondered that he looked so sad. Placing his feet
upon a footstool, he began:--

“Many years ago, after I had graduated at college, I had a strong
desire for a situation on one of the railways that was then being built
through the United States. Through the influence of my friends, I
received a position as fireman on one of the leading roads.

“I soon won the esteem and good will of all of the officers and
employees on the road. As time passed, the superintendent and I became
deeply attached to each other. We were about the same age. There is
nothing I would not do for Frank Benway. I realized the duties of my
position and determined to discharge them honorably.

“But I was led away,--led down, down, where so many have gone before
and since. I was induced by thoughtless associates to drink. One
evening I had drunk more than usual, when Frank Benway came in. I did
not see him until he touched me on the arm.

“‘Ben,’ said he, ‘come away! for my sake, come away.’

[Illustration: “_Just one more drink_”]

“He took my arm and led me out into the cool, night air. When he spoke
again, it was in a pleading, sorrowful tone.

“‘Ben, for the sake of your mother, for the sake of the friendship
between us, never drink again. Good night, my dear friend.’

“I went to my lodgings with a dizzy head and a heavy heart. I knew
that my friend ought to turn me away from my situation, but he was too
kindhearted, and had too much confidence in me, even yet, to do that.
(I knew that he fully expected that I would heed his earnest entreaty.)

“But when I awoke the next morning, I again felt the strong thirst
for liquor. In one of my pockets I found a flask, filled with brandy
which I had procured the night before. I had started down the hill,
and thought I could not resist the temptation to take just one more
drink,--_just one more_.

“The Superintendent had gone down the road on an express train, early
that morning, as there were some repairs to be made part way down the
line, which he wished to superintend personally.

“Our train started in about an hour after the express. The engineer of
the train had been detained at the other end of the road on account
of sickness. I was alone on the engine, but the conductor had perfect
confidence in my ability.

“I had never drunk enough to become intoxicated before, and no one
on the train suspected that I had formed the fatal habit. I still
continued to drink until I became so helpless I could not stand, and
this was after I had taken my place in the cab of the engine.

“I fell against the tender soon after we got under way, and cut a
severe gash in my forehead. I attempted to rise, but could not. My
senses were clear, however, and I knew all that was passing with
horrible reality.

“I had fallen in such a position that I could see out at one side
between the tender and the engine. On, on we swept at lightning speed,
with no hand to guide the train or to regulate its speed.

“We had just passed the point where they were making the repairs I
spoke of, when, as we swept around a little bend in the road, I saw
Frank Benway, a few rods ahead of us, walking swiftly up the track.
Suddenly I saw him step upon a bit of stone which lay there, and,
slipping, his foot was caught between the ground and the rail.

“O how he struggled to rise, but could not! On we rushed. My poor
friend’s pitiful efforts to rise were in vain. And it is still the
bitterest moment of my life that at that moment I was too intoxicated
to reverse the engine, which I might have done, probably in time to
have saved his life!

“There I lay, bound by the horrible chains which I had forged for
myself. I could not move! Frank saw me, for he had fallen across the
track on the side where I lay on the cab floor. He held out both hands
to me, as if to say: ‘Help me, Ben, help me’!

“In another moment I was so near that I could look into his eyes, and
the next, they were closed forever. A brakeman who saw Frank when
we passed over him, now rushed to the engine, and finding me lying
disgracefully stupid, I suppose divined it all. He stopped the train.

“Frank’s remains were gathered up, and I was taken to my home, a raving
maniac. None on the train save this brakeman suspected I had been
drunk. He kept my secret--why I never knew. Perhaps he thought I was
punished enough. I was ill with brain fever for a long time.

“After I recovered, I _never_ tasted another drop of liquor. It seemed
as if I was more than a murderer. Afterward, when I went on the road
again, I was a changed man. I gradually worked myself up until I became
president of that road.

“Young friends, when you pass out from your parents’ care, there will
be many temptations to allure you. Then, I trust, you will bear in
mind the evening when you heard Uncle Ben’s sad story, told _in the
twilight_ of his life.”




JACOB BELL’S VOW


Good-by, Jim Brown, you have got the last cent of my money that you
will ever get,” said a poor, miserable looking wretch, as he turned
to leave the bar-room of a hotel, where a large company of men sat
drinking and carousing.

“I guess when you find a few cents, I shall get them, Jake,” answered
the besotted landlord with a sneer, “but I tell you again that you will
get no more drinks of me until you pay off the old debt.”

“Good-by, Jim Brown,” said old Jake again, “you will never get one cent
of it, nor will you ever sell me another glass of strong drink.”

“Goin’ to sign the pledge, Jake?” queried another voice, “guess ’twill
not do you much good if you do, for you like rum too well to keep it
long.”

“Maybe I shall sign the pledge,” was the reply, “but I consider my word
here, just as sacred and binding as a written pledge, and so I solemnly
swear before God and man never to touch another drop of the accursed
poison so long as I live,” and Jake retreated toward the door as he
said it.

“Hold on, Jake, don’t go yet,” called out another voice, “come back and
I will treat you. Here, landlord, give him a good glass of whiskey to
make him better natured.” But Jake never looked toward the speaker,
and still kept moving slowly toward the door.

“You will try in vain, I guess,” he slowly said, “for I have drunk my
last glass of liquor, God helping me,” and old Jake Bell walked away.

[Illustration: “_I have drunk my last glass of liquor_”]

“Wonder what has got into the old fool,” said one of the bar-room
loungers, “for I never knew him to refuse a glass of whiskey before.”

“Guess he’ll come back before many days go by,” was heard from another
part of the room.

“Suppose that old Jake should reform,” said one who had not spoken
before, “I never saw him with such a fit on, and if he should stick to
what he said, Landlord Brown has lost one of his best customers.”

“And a few shillings besides,” chimed in another voice.

“Guess he has not lost much by old Jake Bell, for if I’m not mistaken,
his money has been quite an advantage to Jim Brown for a number of
years,” was the reply.

“Stop your noise, will you?” said the landlord, with a scowl on his
face, “I’ll take care of old Jake.”

“Perhaps he’ll take care of himself,” was his reply, “and I think he
would do quite as well, and his wife and children would be the gainers.”

“Stop your infernal noise, Bill Gray, or leave the room,” yelled the
landlord, growing black with passion.

“If I do go,” said Bill quietly, “I shall go as old Jake did, never to
come back again. You know that what Bill Gray says, he means.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Susan Bell sat by the low window of her house, looking out upon the
beautiful landscape, bathed with the golden rays of the setting
sun. There was an expression of pain and sadness upon her face, and
occasionally a tear gleamed in her faded eyes.

We doubt if the glory of the fields and the sky had awakened one
cheerful thought in her heart, and if it did, the dark clouds of misery
soon turned the ray of sunlight to gloom again. Ah! the bright hopes of
other days had long ago died out from the heart of Susan Bell, and the
gray shadows of wretchedness had long thronged her pathway.

But the time had been when this wretched woman had seen bright days of
happiness, though they appeared now like some fairy dream, which cast
its mocking glory upon the barren wastes of life.

Strong drink had destroyed the hopes of poor Susan Bell, and driven
peace and plenty away from the once cheerful fireside. It had ruined
the prospects of Jacob Bell, and made him a miserable, besotted wretch.
In other days he had been loved and respected, for he possessed many
noble, generous qualities, and he seemed likely to become a man of more
than ordinary usefulness in the world.

But he became possessed with a thirst for strong drink, and so started
upon the fearful road of sin and ruin. His children once made music in
their home, but after he began his career of sin and shame, disease
laid its hand upon two of them, and they died.

Mrs. Bell did not murmur as the death angel claimed them, for she
saw the storm that was gathering. It came all too soon, and then she
thanked God that there were only two children left to suffer the abuse
of a drunken father and to bear the heavy load of want and poverty. Jim
Brown had taken the earnings of the husband and father for many years,
and in return, gave him the deadly poison that made him a brute and
deadened every impulse of nobleness.

“He has gone to Brown’s, as usual,” said Susan Bell to herself. “Oh,
how I wish that he would not go there so often! He will never even try
to reform as long as he goes there to spend his leisure hours.”

A tear dropped from her eyes as she looked in the direction of the
village tavern. “It will do no good to hope any longer, for he will
never do any better,” she said half aloud.

The sun went down behind the western mountain and twilight began to
gather over the earth. Still Susan Bell sat by the low window, looking
toward the now lighted bar-room. “Why! he is coming!” she exclaimed,
as she saw the well known form of her husband, coming down the street,
in the twilight. “How strange that Jacob should come home so early; I
wonder what it means.”

[Illustration: “_Susan Bell sat by the low window_”]

Jacob walked steadily into the house, and in a pleasant voice asked:
“Susan, will you get some supper? I am very hungry.”

“We have but little to eat, Jacob,” was the reply, “but I will get you
what we have.”

“Have we any coffee?”

“No, but perhaps I can borrow a little of Mrs. Blake.”

“Have we any flour or sugar, Susan,” was the next inquiry.

“None,” was the reply.

“Then I will go and buy some,” said Jacob. “Mr. Grant is owing me for a
half day’s work, and I guess he can pay me.”

Susan Bell’s heart beat very fast as her husband started out again. “Oh,
if he does not stop at Brown’s!” she exclaimed to herself.

He did not stop at Brown’s, although a dozen voices called to him as he
was passing by. “I think you will not succeed,” he said quietly, as he
walked toward home.

“Now, make me a cup of coffee, Susan,” he said, as he placed several
small packages upon the table.

His wife quickly obeyed, and in a short time Jacob sat down to a better
supper than he had had for many a day.

“I am very tired to-night,” he said, as he finished the meal, “but
please call me early in the morning, Susan, for I am going to work for
Mr. Grant. I have taken the job of building his barn, and want to get
it well started this week.”

Mrs. Bell could scarcely sleep that night; there was a strange, deep
joy in her heart, that she had not known for years. And yet, she hardly
dared to hope. She really could not account for the strange conduct of
her husband.

The day came with its beautiful splendor, and just as the morning sun
began to bathe the far away mountains with light, Jacob Bell sat down
to his morning meal.

After breakfast, he asked: “Have you enough flour to last to-day?”

“We have a little,” was the reply.

The day passed away at last, and just as the sun was setting, Jacob
Bell entered the door of his home.

“Here are three dollars, Susan,” he said. “Take the money and use it as
you think best. Herbert can bring home whatever you like, for he will
not work any longer for Mr. Hill. He is not strong enough to do such
work as he has been in the habit of doing there. He will go to school
the remainder of the summer.”

[Illustration: “_Here are three dollars_”]

Mrs. Bell said not a word. She only hoped and prayed.

Another day passed away and three dollars more were placed in her
hands. A whole week went by, and her husband had worked every day, and
had not once visited Jim Brown’s saloon.

Then he came home one night with a new suit of clothes.

“These were a present to me,” he said simply, in reply to Susan’s
inquiry. “Mr. Grant gave them to me.”

“And why did he do it, Jacob?” asked Susan in a trembling voice.

“If I tell you, then you will know my secret. But I think I will. It
was because I signed the pledge.”

“Have you signed the pledge, Jacob?” asked the wife in a voice choked
with emotion.

“Yes,” he quietly answered, “and with God’s help, I will keep it. Jim
Brown has got the last cent of my money that he will ever get.”

“Why did you take this step?” Susan asked, trying very hard to keep her
voice from trembling.

“I can’t really tell you, Susan, but Mr. Grant, I think, was the true
cause of it. He has talked so earnestly and kindly to me of late, that
I saw myself as I never did before.

“And then about a week ago, I went to Jim Brown’s bar-room and asked
him to trust me for a drink. I was owing him a few shillings, and as
he was nearly drunk himself, he refused to trust me. I was very angry;
and then I made a vow before all present never to drink another drop of
liquor, and as I have said before, God helping me, I will never taste
that accursed poison again.”

Susan Bell silently thanked God, and earnestly prayed that he would
help her husband to keep his vow sacredly.

Five years have passed away with their sunshine and shadow, and still
Jacob Bell keeps his vow. The old brown house has been transformed by
his skillful hand, and it is the prettiest cottage in the village.
Everything about the place betokens thrift and plenty.

Jacob Bell looks much younger than he did five years ago, and for some
reason, people do not call him “Old Jake.” The village tavern still
stands, but old Jim Brown died long ago with delirium tremens. Another
rum seller fills his place, but Jacob Bell has never spoken to him.

Thus did the drunkard keep his vow.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions? who hath
babbling? who hath wounds without cause? who hath redness of
eyes?--They that tarry long at the wine; they that go to seek mixed
wine.

“Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it giveth his color
in the cup, when it moveth itself aright. At the last it biteth like a
serpent, and stingeth like an adder.”--_Solomon._

“Every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all
things.”--_Paul._




TESTIMONY OF RELIGIOUS BODIES


“We hold that the proper attitude of Christians toward this [liquor]
traffic, is one of uncompromising opposition.”--_General Conference of
the Methodist Episcopal Church at Philadelphia, Pa., 1884._

“That curse of our race--alcohol ... the enemy alike of God and
man.”--_Methodist Episcopal Church, South, General Conference, 1883._

“The giant evil of the age--the curse of curses.”--_Cumberland
Presbyterian Church, General Assembly at Lebanon, Tenn., May, 1878._

“There can be no compromise with this evil [liquor traffic].”--_United
Presbyterian Church Assembly, 1885._

“Nearly allied to theft and robbery, and in its consequences far
exceeds them in enormity.”--_Free Baptist Church, General Conference,
Fairport, N. Y., 1853._

“Opposed to _all traffic_ in intoxicating drinks.”--_Moravian Church,
Synod of 1873._

“Utterly inconsistent with the character and profession of members
of the church of Christ to encourage in any way the traffic in
intoxicating liquors.”--_Reformed Dutch Church, General Synod, at
Syracuse, N. Y., June, 1885._

“The enemy of religion, of good morals, and of the best interests of
our race.”--_Lutheran Church, General Synod, 1879._




ONLY A GLASS OF BEER


Boys, did you ever stop to think that it is always the first wrong step
that leads to misery and disgrace? The first petty theft leads to the
penitentiary, and the first glass to the gutter, and finally to the
drunkard’s grave.

None who had ever known Robert Morris in his brilliant young manhood,
could have dreamed of the awful fate which would finally be his. Robert
was uncommonly apt in his studies, kind and courteous in his manners,
and gentlemanly in appearance. He had the advantage of having been
raised in a home of refinement and temperance.

But in an evil hour, he formed the acquaintance of a young man of bad
principles and reckless life. For some time Robert’s high sense of
honor triumphed. But he could not endure the ridicule of his friend:--

“What a fool you are, Rob, old boy; come, sir, I didn’t think you were
such a coward! ha! ha! afraid of a glass of beer!”

“I’m not afraid, Jack Horton, and I’m no coward.” The next moment, and
for the first time in his life, a glass of beer was pressed to his lips.

But it was by no means the last. Little by little a craving was
developed for the poison--a burning thirst. His loving friends did
everything in their power to rescue him. But his eyes became bloodshot,
his hair unkempt, his body bloated, and his once fine intellect, like
his body, defaced and ruined. Finally, after a short career of vice and
folly, we followed him to an unhonored grave. His aged father groaned
in agony; while the fainting form of his gray-haired mother was borne
by kind hands away from the last resting place of her son.

My boy, remember that if you do not allow the first glass of liquor to
pass your lips, you will never become that horrible thing--that blot on
the fair creation of God--a drunkard. Do not forget that at last “it
biteth like a serpent,” and that “no drunkard shall inherit the kingdom
of God.”




IMPORTANT TESTIMONY


Wine is a mocker.--_Solomon._

A curse.--_Queen Victoria._

A scandal and a shame.--_Wm. E. Gladstone._

A trap for workingmen.--_Earl Cairnes._

Stupefies and besots.--_Bismarck._

The devil in solution.--_Sir Wilfred Lawson._

Liquid fire and distilled damnation.--_Robert Hall._

The mother of want and the nurse of crime.--_Lord Brougham._

Drunkenness is the ripe fruit of moderate drinking.--_Frances E.
Willard._




ALCOHOL A CAUSE OF DISEASE


“A foe more dreadful or deadly than the Russian or the
plague.”--_Florence Nightingale, from the “Crimea.”_

“Most diseases have their rise in intemperance.”--_Lord Bacon._

“An active and powerful cause of disease.”--_Prof. Youmans._

“The evils of alcohol are wide-spread and countless.”--_C. R. Agnew, M.
D._

“Sooner or later proves injurious to the human constitution without any
exception.”--_Sir B. Brodie, Sir James Clark, Sir J. Eyre, Dr. Marshall
Hall, Dr. A. T. Thompson, Dr. A. Ure, the Queen’s Physicians, and
seventy-eight leaders in Medicine and Surgery, of England, 1839._

“Alcohol is neither a food nor a drink suitable for his [man’s] natural
demands.”--_B. W. Richardson, M. A., M. D., F. R. S._

“If alcohol were unknown, half the sin and a large part of the poverty
and unhappiness would disappear from the world.”--_Edmond W. Parkes, M.
D., F. R. S._

“The curse of an army is intoxicating liquors.”--_Parkes._

“Injurious to health, destructive to life.”--_Kant._

“Has inflicted greater calamities than war, pestilence, and
famine.”--_Gladstone._




TURNING OVER A NEW LEAF


Tis a shame!” said Mrs. Fogg, as she hurried away after the funeral of
Mrs. Grant, escaping from the poor, desolate room, where two children,
hardly more than babes, were sleeping, unconscious that they were
motherless. “’Tis a shame that nobody’ll take them.”

“Yes--a bitter shame!” replied a neighbor, who was also getting off as
fast as she could, so as to shift the responsibility onto some other
shoulders.

“There’s Mrs. Grove. She might take them as well as not. But they’ll go
to the poorhouse, for all she cares.”

“Well, somebody’ll have to answer for it,” said Mrs. Fogg. “As for me,
I’ve got young ones enough of my own.”

“We left Mrs. Cole in the room. She has only one child, and her husband
is well to do. I can’t believe she’ll have the heart to turn away from
them.”

“She’s got the heart for anything. But we’ll see.”

Mrs. Cole did turn away from the sleeping babes, sighing very loud,
that others might hear and give her credit for a sympathy and concern
she did not feel.

At last all were gone--all but a man named John Wheaton, and a poor
woman, not able to take care of herself.

“What’s to become of these children?” questioned Mr. Wheaton.

“Don’t know. Poorhouse, I s’pose,” answered the woman.

“Poorhouse?”

“Yes, nobody wants them, and there’s no other place for them.”

“Mamma! mamma!” cried a plaintive voice, and a flaxen-haired child, not
more than two year old, rose up in the bed and looked piteously about
the room. “I want my mamma!”

A great, choking sob came into the man’s throat. Then the other child
awoke:--

“Don’t cry, sissy--mamma’s gone away.” At this, the little one began
crying bitterly.

“I can’t stand this nohow!” exclaimed the man; and going to the bed, he
gathered the two children into his arms, hushing and comforting them
with soothing words....

“What on earth have you got there?” exclaimed Mrs. Wheaton as her
husband came striding into the room where she sat mending one of his
well-worn garments.

“Two babies!” he answered, in a voice so unusual that Mrs. Wheaton
dropped her work on the floor and rose up in amazement.

“What?”

[Illustration]

“Mrs. Grant’s two babies. I’ve been over to the funeral, and I tell
you, Jane, it wasn’t in me to see those two little things carted off
to the almshouse. There wasn’t a woman to look after them, no, not
one. Every soul sneaked off but Polly Jones, and she’s of no account
you know. Just look at their dear little faces!” And John Wheaton held
them up in his arms, and let their tender, tearful, half-frightened,
half-wondering eyes plead their own cause with his wife, and they did
not plead in vain.

Surprised as she was, and with an instant’s protest in her heart, Mrs.
Wheaton could not, in the presence of these motherless little ones,
utter a word of remonstrance.

She took the youngest one from the arms of her husband and spoke to it
tenderly. The child sobbed two or three times, and then laid its head
against her bosom.

There was an ocean of mother-love in the heart of this woman, who
had never been a mother, the instant her breast felt the pressure of
the baby’s head, and the arm that drew it closer with an involuntary
impulse, was moved by this new love.

Not many words passed between the husband and wife--at least, not
then--though thought was very busy with both of them.

Mrs. Wheaton’s manner toward the children was kind even to tenderness;
and this manner won their confidence and drew from them such little
expressions of satisfaction as touched her heart and filled it with
loving interest.

After nightfall when supper was over and the children asleep, Mr. and
Mrs. Wheaton sat down together, each showing a little reserve and
embarrassment. Mrs. Wheaton was the first to speak.

“What were you thinking about, John?” she said, almost sharply. “I
can’t have these children.”

John Wheaton did not lift his eyes or reply, but there was a certain
dogged and resolute air about him that his wife noticed as unusual.

“Somebody else must take them,” she continued.

“The county?” replied her husband, testily.

“Yes. There’s room for them at the almshouse, and no where else that I
know of, unless they stay here.

“Unless they stay here,” she repeated. Mrs. Wheaton’s voice rose a
little. “It’s easy enough to say that, but who is to care for them?”

“It’s a great undertaking, I know,” answered the husband, meekly, yet
with a new quality in his voice that did not escape the quick ear of
his wife, “and the burden must fall on you.”

“I wouldn’t mind that so much, but--”

She kept back the sentence that was on her tongue.

“But what?” asked her husband.

“John,” said Mrs. Wheaton, drawing herself up in a resolute manner, and
looking steadily in her husband’s face, “as things are going on--”

“Things shall go on differently,” interrupted Wheaton. “I’ve thought it
all over.”

“How differently, John?”

“Oh! in every way I’ll turn over a new leaf.”

John Wheaton saw a light flash into his wife’s face.

“First and foremost, I’m not going to lose any more days. Last month I
had six days docked from my wages.”

“Why, John!”

“It’s true--more’s the shame for me. That was eighteen dollars, you
see, not counting the money I fooled away with idle company--enough to
pay for all these babies would eat and wear, twice over.”

“Oh, John!” There was something eager and hopeful in his wife’s face as
she leaned toward him.

“I’m in downright earnest, Jane,” he answered. “If you’ll take the
babies, I’ll do my part. I’ll turn over a new leaf. There shall be no
more lost days; no more foolish wasting of money; no more spending of
evenings at McBride’s.”

“Oh, John!” In her surprise and delight she could only repeat the
exclamation. As she did so, she rose, and putting her hands on his
shoulders, bend and kissed him on the forehead.

[Illustration: “_OH, JOHN_”]

“You’ll take the babies?” said he.

“Yes, and twenty more, if you keep to this, and stay so,” answered
Jane, laughing through her tears.

“All right, then, it’s a bargain,” and John Wheaton caught his wife’s
hand and shook it by way of confirmation.

From that time Mr. Wheaton turned over a new leaf. Neighbors expressed
surprise when it was known that John and Jane Wheaton had adopted
the two orphan children. Fellow workmen taunted John, calling him a
soft-hearted fool, for “taking other men’s brats.”

One said to him, “Are four mouths easier to fill than two?” Another,
“You’ll be sick of this before the year’s out.” Another, “I’ll see you
sold out by the constable in less than six months.”

But John had little to say in reply, only maintaining an air of quiet
good humor and showing more interest in his work.

For three weeks John Wheaton had not lost a day--something very
unusual; and not one evening during that time had he spent at McBride’s
saloon.

His poor little house, which had come to have a neglected look, was
putting on a new appearance. The gate that for months had hobbled on
one hinge, now swung smoothly, and the mended latch held it shut. Rank
weeds no longer filled the dooryard. The broken steps were mended, and
clean panes of glass filled many places in the sash where had been
unsightly rags and sheets of paper.

Within, pleasant changes were also apparent. Various new but
inexpensive pieces of furniture were to be found. Old things were
mended, polished up, and wonderfully improved. With all of this,
marvellous to relate, Wheaton’s earnings had not only been equal to the
increased expenditures, but there was an actual surplus of ten dollars
in hand.

“I never would have believed it,” said John, as he and his wife sat one
evening talking over their improved condition, after the babies--loved
now almost as if their own--were asleep.

“It’s just as old Brown used to say, ‘Waste takes more than want.’ I
declare I’ve got heart in me again. I thought we should have to let the
place go; that I’d never be able to pay off the mortgage. But here we
are, ten dollars ahead in less than a month; and going on at this rate,
we’ll have the home clear in about eighteen months.

[Illustration: _Beautifying the Home_]

“By the way, Jane, have you noticed how that pretty running rose, that
we have trained over the doorway,--the one that used to look so forlorn
and neglected,--is already beginning to push out its young leaves and
buds? It’s beautiful, isn’t it? Oh, I’m so glad we shall be able to
keep the old home!”

Next day a fellow workman said to John Wheaton, half in banter, “Didn’t
I see the constable down your way yesterday?”

“I shouldn’t wonder,” replied Wheaton, with more gravity of manner than
his questioner had expected.

“I thought I saw him looking around after things, and counting his fees
on his fingers.”

“Likely as not,” replied Mr. Wheaton. “I know of a good many rents
not paid up last quarter. Money gone to McBride’s instead of the
landlord--eh?”

The man winced a little.

“How are the babies?” he asked.

“First rate,” Mr. Wheaton answered, with a smile so real that his
fellow workman could not continue his banter.

Time went on, and to the surprise of all, John Wheaton’s circumstances
kept improving. The babies had brought a blessing to his home. In less
than eighteen months, he had paid off the mortgage that for years had
rested on his little home; and not only this, he had improved it in
various ways, even to putting up a small addition, so as to give them a
neat breakfast room.

The children grew finely,--there were three of them now,--for their
hearts and home had opened to another orphan baby. The three little
ones were carefully trained by Mrs. Wheaton, and had become the light
and joy of the household.

       *       *       *       *       *

Five years have passed away. John Wheaton is a master workman and
employs ten men. He has enlarged his house, and made it one of the
neatest in the village.

[Illustration: “_I guess we’ll have to take a baby or two._”]

Among his men is the very one who bantered him the most about the
children and prophesied that he would soon be sold out by the
constable. Poor man! it was not long before the constable had him in
charge. He had wasted his money at McBride’s, instead of paying it to
the landlord.

Walking home one evening after his work was done, John Wheaton and his
journeyman took the same way. They were silent until they came near the
former’s pretty dwelling, when the journeyman said, half in jest, yet
with undisguised bitterness, “I guess we’ll have to take a baby or two.”

“Why?”

“For good luck,” the other one replied.

“Oh!”

“You’ve had nothing but good luck ever since you took Mrs. Grant’s
orphan children.”

“Only such good luck as any one may have, if he will,” answered Wheaton.

“I can’t see it,” returned the other somewhat bitterly. “Your wages
were no better than mine. I had one child, and you saddled yourself
with two, and not long afterward added a third. And how is it to-day?
You have a nice house, and your wife and children are well dressed,
while I have never been able to make ends meet, and my boy looks like a
ragamuffin half the time.”

“Do you see that house over there--the largest and handsomest in the
place?” asked Wheaton.

“Yes.”

“Who owns it?”

“Jimmy McBride.”

“How much did you pay toward the building of it?”

“Me?” in surprise.

“Yes, you. How much did you pay toward the building of it?”

“Why, nothing. Why should I help pay for his house?”

“Sure enough! Why should your hard earnings go to build and furnish an
elegant house for a man who would rather sell liquor, and so ruin his
neighbors, body and soul, than support himself in a useful calling, as
you and I are trying to do?”

“I can’t see what you’re driving at,” replied his companion.

“How much do you spend at McBride’s saloon every week?”

The man stood still with a blank look on his face.

“A dollar a week?” asked Mr. Wheaton.

“Yes.”

“Say a dollar and a half?”

“Well, say as much.”

“Do you know what that amounts to in a year?”

“Never counted it up.”

“Seventy-eight dollars.”

“No!”

“Yes, to a dollar. So, in five years, at this rate, you have
contributed nearly four hundred dollars toward McBride’s handsome
house, without getting anything but harm in return, and haven’t a
shingle over your head that you can call your own.

“Now it’s my advice, in a friendly way, that you stop helping McBride
and begin to help yourself. He’s comfortable enough, and can do
without your dollar and a half a week. Take a baby, for good luck, as
you call it, if you will. You’ll find one over at the poorhouse; it
won’t cost you half as much as helping McBride, and I don’t think he
needs your aid any longer. But here we are at home, and I see my wife
and children waiting for me. Come in, won’t you?”

[Illustration]

“No, thank you. I’ll go home and talk to Ellen about taking a baby for
good luck.”

And he tried to smile, as he called back, after a few steps:--

“If you see anything of my Jack about your place, just send him home,
won’t you?”

Jack was there, dirty, and meanly dressed, and in striking contrast
with John Wheaton’s three adopted children, who, with the only mother
they knew, gave the happy man a joyful welcome.

“I have turned over a new leaf,” said the journeyman when he came to
work the next morning.

“Indeed! I am glad to hear it,” returned Mr. Wheaton.

“Ellen and I talked it over last night. I am done helping saloon
keepers build handsome houses. I’m glad you put it to me in that way. I
never looked at it so before. But it’s just the hard truth. What fools
we are!”

“Going to take a baby?” questioned Mr. Wheaton, smiling.

“Well, we haven’t just settled that; but Ellen heard yesterday of a
poor little thing that would have to go to the county house unless some
one agrees to take it, and I shouldn’t wonder now if she opened her
heart,--for she’s a motherly body.”

“Where is it?” asked Mr. Wheaton.

“Down at the Woodbury mills.”

“Look here, Frank. Take my advice, and put this baby between you and
McBride’s saloon.”

Only a little while did the man hesitate. Then he exclaimed:--

“I’ll do it!”

“Do it at once, then,” said Mr. Wheaton. “Put on your coat and go over
to the mills and get the baby. It will be an angel in your house, that
will help and bless you in every hour of temptation. Go at once. God
has opened for you this way of safety, and if you walk therein, all
will be well.”

He did walk therein, and all _was_ well. Mr. Wheaton’s prophesy was
fulfilled. In less than two years, the journeyman had his own roof over
his head, and it covered a happy home.




IN THE HOUSE OF HIS FRIENDS

BY MRS. L. D. AVERY-STUTTLE


Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, ... hath lifted up
his heel against me.”

The largest church in Jonesville was well filled that Sabbath, for it
was communion day, and the eloquent Mr. Barnes was to fill the pulpit,
and officiate with the pastor at the Lord’s table.

The congregation was very select,--in fact, it was mostly composed of
the well-to-do residents of the town; and the Master’s words, “The
poor ye have always with you,” would hardly have seemed an appropriate
text--especially on this particular morning.

But there was one gentle little woman, with a child in her arms and a
little girl by her side, who sat in a pew far up in front, toward the
right of the altar, in whose dark eyes there lurked a shadow, and in
whose heart had entered a terrible fear.

The man who sat beside her was a noble looking fellow, broad
of shoulder, strong of limb, stalwart of frame. But to a close
observer there still appeared marks of past dissipation and reckless
intemperance, which had left there unmistakable tokens on cheek and
brow,--tokens which even the charitable hand of time must be many
years in effacing altogether.

And it had been only one little year since Burton Holbrook had been
plucked even as a brand from the burning; but in all the year, not once
had the accursed cup touched his lips.

Burton Holbrook could not remember when he had first learned to love
the cup; the terrible heritage had been his from birth,--a heritage
bequeathed him by his poor father, whose drunken carousals had made his
childhood miserable.

And so the heritage of thirst had been his; and he had fought it
manfully, bravely all the years. But the record of the years had been
filled with shameful defeat so often that the little woman by his side
had been well nigh discouraged many times.

But in the past few months a new hope had been born,--a hope bright
with anticipation and big with promise.

For Burton Holbrook had been converted and joined the church.

“You can never conquer in your own strength,” she had said; and her
prayers had ascended day and night unceasingly. And one glad day he had
come to her, with a new light in his eyes and a new song upon his lips.

Then, almost as if by magic, prosperity seemed to come to them by leaps
and bounds; friends multiplied; a position was offered him, lucrative
beyond his wildest dreams. Within the year, the humble home had been
exchanged for a pleasant cottage on one of the better streets, and
from this cottage ascended night and morning, songs and prayers of
thanksgiving and praise.

And this Sabbath he was attending communion service for the first time.

Strange that sad thoughts should intrude,--that unwelcome fears, and
dim, shadowy forebodings should come trooping into the heart of the
little woman by his side,--to-day of _all_ days,--to-day, when her cup
of joy was full to the brim!

[Illustration: “_Songs of thanksgiving and praise_”]

In the very beginning of the services, she had suddenly remembered that
it was communion day,--yes, yes, she had known that, all the time. But
now she realized with a dull pain at her heart, that there would be
wine. There must be; and it would be the wine that intoxicates!

Ah! too well she knew the demons that forever dogged her husband’s
footsteps! Given the slightest opportunity, and they were about him in
troops. Was there, then, no spot too sacred for them to invade? Was
there to be no safety, even within the sacred courts of the house of
the Lord?

In her perfect happiness, she had not given it a thought; but now, she
wondered vaguely why she had not remembered. Ah, once before, in those
awful days that seemed so long, long ago,--once before, a single taste
of red wine had been his undoing!

How helpless she felt, as she sat by his side and glanced timidly up
into his handsome face--her noble husband! And she reflected that she
had urged him to unite with the church long before he had thought of
offering himself. She had told him that this would be such a source of
strength to him! And now she shuddered.

Why had no one cared for his soul? Why had no voice been raised in
protest? And then she remembered hearing Mrs. Jones, the deaconess,
once say that she had protested against this thing; but the pastor had
only smiled and treated the matter lightly,--in fact he had gone so
far as to insinuate that “it would be casting a reflection upon the
respectability” of his eminently respectable congregation, to offer
them new wine at communion, when they had always been accustomed to the
old!

So it would have been of no use for her to protest. The pastor would
have scorned her husband as a weakling--her strong, noble husband.

But see, the red wine has already been uncovered; the blessing has been
pronounced,--ah, surely it is only the emblem of the spilled blood of
the Man of Sorrows!

Burton Holbrook starts. His face is white as chiseled marble. His
breath comes in quick, hard gasps. Already the subtle scent of the red
wine is in his nostrils.

The little woman marks with strange distinctness, the white, delicate
fingers of the pastor, as he offers the glass to her husband,--for they
are in the pew near the altar. The words which the minister had read
that morning, ring in her ears: “Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom
I trusted, ... hath lifted up his heel against me.”

She turns her eyes in sickening fear upon the man. His face is gray
and drawn, the muscles of his neck are working, and the blue veins are
standing out upon his forehead. He turns his eyes in piteous appeal
toward his wife, then toward the pastor. Then over his haggard face
there flits an expression of mad desire. The fiends of darkness are
tapping upon his forehead and beckoning to him insistently.

Even the pastor starts with alarm as Burton Holbrook reaches his
trembling fingers toward the glass. A fire like the smouldering fires
of the pit leaps into his dark eyes,--and the glass is drained.

There was an uneasy, expectant rustle in the congregation. The minister
turned his eyes for a moment. It was enough. Burton Holbrook sprang
like a famished tiger and snatched at the pitcher. In a moment more, it
was empty.

[Illustration: “_Down the long aisle rushed a frenzied, hatless man_”]

Then, down the long aisle of horrified, frightened faces, and out into
the quiet streets, rushed a frenzied, hatless man.

       *       *       *       *       *

Over at the saloon on the nearest corner, lingered a few of the former
companions of Burton Holbrook, discussing their old comrade, over their
cups:--

“Been almost a year, I think, hasn’t it, since Holbrook last favored us
with his company?” questioned the bartender sneeringly, as he handed a
foaming glass to a young man whose trembling hand and thick speech told
a pitiful story of disease and dissipation.

“Considers himself mighty good, I reckon,” was the reply.

“I’ve done everything I could to get him to give up those high and
lofty notions of his,” shamelessly admitted another.

“I’m right glad I don’t have to sell _my_ liberty,” blustered Jack
Hartwell, “and I told him so the other day; but he had an answer ready,
of course. Real, reg’lar parson, Burt’s got to be, since he’s quit us.”

“That makes me think,” stammered an old man from across the room,
“Holbrook’s gone and joined the church, so they say,--got clear off
the devil’s ground, I s’pose he thinks, now,--but,--” and the old man
lowered his voice, while a hateful grin distorted his bloated face,
“but we’ll see--we’ll see. He’s no whit better than the rest of us,
that he should,--”

“No,” interrupted the bartender, with an oath, “somebody’s likely been
preachin’ to him. But if he thinks he’s safe, just because--”

But the bartender never finished his speech. Into the midst of them
rushed a man, breathless and hatless, with haggard face and wild,
hollow eyes.

“Let me drink, man! let me drink! I’ve sold my soul for it. The demons
of hell have got me this time! I have held my own against them for a
year,--but they caught me,--caught me in the church,--and--and I _will
die_, but I _must_ have my drink!”

       *       *       *       *       *

Within another month, delirium tremens, with its unspeakable horrors,
had claimed its victim.

But I am glad to say that now there is _one_ church in Jonesville,
which offers nothing but pure, sweet, new wine at communion.

But still a poor, heartbroken little woman murmurs over and over again,
“‘Woe unto him that giveth his neighbor drink!’”

[Illustration]




THE SIGN BOARD


[Illustration]

Everybody liked Tom Hall, and everybody was sorry for him. It was sad
to see such a fine young man a victim of drunkenness, and Tom had
fallen into the mocker’s power unwittingly, it seems. A new saloon had
been opened close to the foundry at which he worked, and he, along with
others, was in the habit of going in for a glass of beer.

When the cold weather set in, he took something stronger, until he
began to imagine that spirits agreed with him. Tom went on, and the
liking for strong drink increased, until at all hours he might be
seen staggering out of the “Rainbow,” _dizzy_ and stupefied with the
intoxicating cup.

Tom’s was a very sad case. He belonged to a respectable family, and he
had been religiously trained, and until he was drawn into the snare, he
was an affectionate son and brother. Friends counseled, and ministers
preached, and every means was tried to reclaim him, but all effort
seemed lost,--Tom was bound hard and fast with the invisible chains of
the “mocker.” His family mourned him as lost, and many a silent tear
his sister dropped on his tattered garments as she sat darning and
patching them.

“Ah, these rents will not darn again,” said Jennie, as she turned over
Tom’s ragged raiment. In Tom’s better days, he had pride, and it was a
sad change when he didn’t care who saw him “out at the elbows.”

But somehow Jennie could not find it in her heart to abandon the
brother she still loved, and so Tom’s tattered garments were taken up
again, and made the most of.

“_Kindness_ may win him back,” said Jennie, and when he came home at
the worst, he was met in peace,--if in sorrow.

Just when the trees were beginning to bud with the promise of spring,
Tom came home looking quite thoughtful. He was sober after a long run.

In the last rays of the setting sun, his sister was trying to cover
some old darns.

Tom stood beside her, and silently watched the patient fingers for some
time.

[Illustration: “_That’s tiresome work, Jennie._”]

“That’s tiresome work, Jennie,” he said. His sister held up her seam
before him.

“Why, that is a bunch of rags,” said Tom.

“Yes, Tom; and a bunch of rags would be the best sign board that a
saloon keeper could hang over his door,” said Jennie, sadly.

Tom made no reply. He looked at the rags in silence.

Next morning Tom went back to his work and continued steady for two or
three weeks.

He looked toward the “Rainbow,” but didn’t go in.

“Hello! what’s up with Tom Hall?” wondered Sinclair, as he filled up a
glass of Tom’s favorite whisky for another customer at the counter.

Sinclair was not the only one who was astonished at the change.

Every day Tom went to his work; every night he came home sober, and
after a time he appeared at church on the Sabbath. Then people began to
believe that Tom was in earnest, and really meant to reform.

“Has Tom Hall really become a teetotaler?” queried Sinclair, when a
whole month had passed without a visit to the “Rainbow.”

Well, it seemed so, for nothing stronger than water had passed his lips
since that night on which his sister had shown him the bunch of rags.
“I’ll have a talk with Tom and learn how he got off the scent, though,”
Sinclair resolved.

An opportunity came sooner than he expected. In the beginning of summer
a terrific thunderstorm passed over Airlie, and among the general
devastation, Sinclair’s sign board was shivered to atoms.

Tom happened to be passing the “Rainbow” next morning, and stopped to
glance up at the old mark.

“Fine work here, the storm’s done for us,” remarked Mr. Sinclair, who
was standing in his door, “and I’ll have to get a new sign board.”

“Is it so bad as that?” asked Tom.

“Yes, the ‘Rainbow’ is in shivers.”

“Then you’ll want a new sign board,” suggested Tom.

“Of course; isn’t that what I’m telling you?”

“Is it to be the ‘Rainbow’ again?” asked Tom.

“I suppose so,” answered Mr. Sinclair, “unless you can give a new idea,
Tom.”

“I think I can,” returned Tom; “but I must go home first.”

“Don’t forget, though,” said Mr. Sinclair.

“But you’re a stranger now-a-days, by the by, Tom.”

“I won’t be long,” answered Tom, as he hurried toward home.

A better sign board than “The Rainbow” Mr. Sinclair did not expect to
get; he was only joking with Tom Hall, and he raised his eyebrows when
Tom made his appearance, with a bundle under his arm, and requested him
to look at the new sign board.

“I didn’t think you would catch me up; but step in, Tom, and let me see
your idea.”

Tom gravely undid his bundle, and held up a bunch of rags before the
saloon keeper’s astonished eyes.

[Illustration]

“What do you mean, Tom?” asked Mr. Sinclair, feeling confident that Tom
had lost his senses.

“You want a new sign board, don’t you?” asked Tom.

“Well, what has a bunch of rags got to do with that?” said Mr. Sinclair.

“Ask yourself, sir, if a bunch of rags is not the best sign board that
can hang across your door,” said Tom, and his lips quivered.

“Was it that bunch of rags that made you a teetotaler, Tom?” said Mr.
Sinclair, more confused than he liked to confess.

“It was one of the means, sir,” answered Tom, “and, perhaps some poor
wretch, seeing in this bunch of rags the future outcome of drink, will
bless you for the sign board.”

Tom walked away to his work, and Mr. Sinclair went back to his counter,
but all day the bunch of rags troubled him.

It was a busy day, but every new comer seemed more deplorably wretched
and worse off than the last served. He was thankful when night came.

The last customer was a woman literally covered with rags. A little
infant sat on her arm. It was crying with cold and hunger.

“Go home and put clothes on your child,” said Mr. Sinclair, flinging
back the money the woman had laid down.

“I have nothing but rags,” said the woman.

“Tom is right,” said Mr. Sinclair; “the end of drink is misery and
rags, and the man who has a taste for that sort of thing may put his
name on the _new sign board_.”

[Illustration]




DAN NAYLOR’S LEGACY


[Illustration]

When Enoch Wilton died, people said that Daniel Naylor was sure to come
into possession of a handsome property, since his Uncle Enoch was known
to be a man of some means, and Daniel was his favorite nephew.

But when the will was read, they changed their minds, for the only
clause it contained which referred to Daniel read as follows:--

  “_And to Daniel Naylor, my beloved nephew, I give and bequeath
  the framed copy of the temperance pledge to which, under Divine
  Providence, I owe salvation from a drunkard’s grave; also to this I
  owe all the material prosperity which has gladdened my latter years.
  And I recommend that he remove it from its frame, and affix his
  signature beneath mine; satisfied that he will find the pledge an
  unfailing source of wealth to him, as it has been to me._”

Daniel Naylor resented this, as he was a drinking man, and he
indignantly stowed away his uncle’s bequest, among the rubbish in
the attic, assuring his wife that, as his uncle had treated him so
shabbily, he should not trouble himself further about it; and there,
for years, it slumbered, utterly forgotten.

Meanwhile, Daniel Naylor’s affairs went from bad to worse, for his
drinking habits had strengthened their hold upon him.

One day, about five years after his uncle’s death, he returned to his
now squalid home, to tell his wife that the last cent had gone, and
that “Squire Grip,” the village lawyer, would, the next day, foreclose
the mortgage on their little place, leaving them homeless.

“Oh Daniel!” exclaimed the poor woman in a tone of despair, “What shall
we do? Where can we go?”

“I do not know,” he responded moodily,--“to the poorhouse, perhaps.”

“Don’t say that, Daniel!” pleaded the wife, “you still have two hands
left, and if--”

“I cannot get employment,” he interrupted. “I have been to all my
employers and to all my friends; I can assure you that I have made
every effort possible. But somehow, they don’t act toward me as they
used to, in the old days when I was more prosperous. I don’t know
what’s the matter, I’m sure. They only shake their heads and say they
are sorry, but the times are so hard they cannot give me work. I shall
have to give it up.”

“But you must not give it up, there must be employment somewhere.”

“But I tell you, I am unable to find it. I have tried everywhere; there
is nothing for me to do.”

“Look here, Daniel, if you will promise me just one thing, I’ll tell
you how you can find work,--Oh, if you would only promise, Daniel!” and
Mrs. Naylor glanced appealingly at her husband.

Daniel Naylor felt a trifle uncomfortable, for he saw traces of tears
in his wife’s eyes, and she had rarely spoken to him so earnestly. But
he only stammered brokenly:--

“What are the conditions?”

“Will you promise?”

“I would rather know the conditions first.”

“The conditions are that you quit your drinking habits and sign the
temperance pledge.”

Daniel Naylor started.

“What!” he cried, in astonishment. “Do you intend to say that my
drinking a little, now and then, interferes with my getting work to do?”

“It certainly does, Daniel,” was the sorrowful reply, “for I have heard
at least one of your old employers say as much.”

“Who was it?”

“Mr. Field.”

“What did he say?”

“You recollect the time, about three weeks ago, when you were--were--”

“Drunk.”

“Yes, when you were drunk. You were at work for him then, and when
he came after you, and I told him you could not come, he guessed the
truth, and I heard him say to his clerk, who was with him, as he drove
off:--

“‘Well, this is the second time Dan Naylor has failed me when I needed
him most, but I shall be sure he does not do it again.’

“And that, my husband, is the source of almost all our trouble, as I
believe you, yourself, will admit when you think the matter over; you
can’t imagine how it makes me feel.” And Mrs. Naylor put her apron to
her eyes and sobbed hysterically.

It was Daniel Naylor’s turn to reflect now,--and it was not the first
time, by any means. This subject had long been troubling him. But
it was very hard for him to acknowledge or to realize that his deep
poverty and misery had been brought about by his own conduct.

[Illustration: “_Seven one thousand dollar notes fell out._”]

“Well, I believe you are right,” he said, at last. “But what can I do?
Our home is gone, and I have lost the confidence of my employers,--so
signing the pledge cannot amount to much.”

“Yes, it would amount to a great deal. It would restore your
self-respect, and in a great measure you would be able to regain their
confidence.”

Then came another period of silence. At last a great purpose entered
his heart, and the light of a firm resolve shone in his eyes.

“Bring me a paper, and I _will sign it_, and may God give me strength
to keep it!”

“Why not sign Uncle Enoch’s pledge?” his wife inquired. “I saw it lying
up in the attic the other day, and if you wish, I will bring it.”

“Certainly; that will save writing another.”

The pledge was soon brought, and Daniel Naylor removed it from the
frame and placed it on the table. As he did so, a roll of brown paper
fell out of its back and dropped unnoticed at his feet.

After he had signed his name under that of his uncle, he turned to
replace the pledge in its frame.

In doing this, his eyes fell upon the small roll of brown paper lying
on the floor.

Stooping to pick it up, he uttered a sudden cry of astonishment, as he
saw the corner of a bank note protruding; with trembling fingers, he
undid the package, to find _seven one thousand dollar notes_, and a
scrap of paper on which was written:--

“Is not the pledge a sure road to wealth?”

“God bless good Uncle Enoch!” he exclaimed fervently. “I can now take
up the mortgage, and as for the pledge, I will keep that sacred as long
as I live.”

And his wife responded with a fervent--

“Amen.”




“DON’T LET HIM HAVE IT”


[Illustration]

If they wouldn’t let him have it!” exclaimed Mrs. Leslie, weeping; “Oh!
if they wouldn’t sell him the liquor, there’d not be any trouble. He’s
one of the best of men when he does not drink. He does not bring liquor
into the house; and he tries very hard, I know, to keep sober, but he
cannot pass Jenk’s tavern.”

Mrs. Leslie was talking with a sympathizing neighbor, who responded by
saying, “It’s a downright shame!”

While this conversation was going on, a little girl, of about six
years, sat listening attentively. After a little while she went quietly
from the room, and took her way down the road unobserved by the mother.

There was a purpose, great and noble, in her mind; she had started on a
mission. “Oh, if they wouldn’t sell him liquor!” Those earnest words of
her mother filled her thoughts. If Mr. Jenks wouldn’t sell her father
drink, there would be no more trouble. How simple the remedy!

She would go to Mr. Jenks and ask him not to let her father have any
more liquor, and all would be well again. Artless, innocent child!

The tavern kept by Jenks--the laziest man in Milanville, stood nearly
a quarter of a mile from the tenement occupied by the Leslies. Toward
this place, under a hot sun, Lizzie made her way, her mind so filled
with its purpose, that she was unconscious of heat or fatigue.

Not long before, a traveler had alighted at the tavern door. After
giving directions to have his horse fed, he entered the barroom, where
Jenks stood behind the counter.

“Have something to drink?” inquired the landlord.

“I’ll take a glass of water, if you please.”

Jenks could not hide the indifference at once felt toward the stranger.
Very deliberately he set a pitcher and glass upon the counter, and then
turned partly away. The stranger poured out a full tumbler of water,
and drank it with an air of satisfaction.

“Good water, that of yours, landlord,” said he.

“Is it?” was returned somewhat uncourteously.

“I call it good water, don’t you?”

“Never drink water by itself.” As Jenks said this, he winked to one
of his customers, who was lounging on the bar. “In fact, it’s so long
since I drank any water that I forget how it tastes. Don’t you, Leslie?”

The man to whom this was addressed was not so far lost to shame as
Jenks. He blushed and looked confused as he replied:--

“It might be better for some of us if we had not lost our relish for
water.”

“A true word spoken, my friend!” said the stranger, turning to the man,
whose swollen visage, and patched, threadbare garments, too plainly
told the story of his life.

“Water, pure water, bright water! is my motto. Its attendants are
health, thrift, and happiness. It takes not away the child’s bread, nor
the toiling wife’s garments.”

There were two or three customers at the bar besides Leslie, to whom
this was addressed; and all of them, in spite of the landlord’s angry
and sneering countenance, treated the stranger with attention and
respect. Seeing this, Jenks could not restrain himself; so, advancing
to the gentleman’s side, and laying his hand rudely on his shoulder, he
said in a peremptory manner:--

“See here, my friend, if you are about to deliver a temperance lecture,
you can adjourn to the town hall or the Methodist chapel.”

The stranger moved aside a pace or two, and then said, mildly, “there
must be something wrong here, if a man may not speak in praise of water
without giving offense.”

“I said you could adjourn your lecture.” The landlord’s face was now a
fiery red, and he spoke with insolence and passion.

“Oh, well, as you are president of the meeting, I suppose we must let
you exercise an arbitrary power of judgment,” said the stranger; “I
didn’t think any one had so strong a dislike of water as to consider
its praise an insult.”

At this moment a child stepped into the barroom. She glanced neither
to the right nor the left, but walked up to the landlord, lifted her
sweet young face, and said in tones that thrilled every heart but his,
“Please, Mr. Jenks, don’t sell papa any more liquor!”

“Off home with you, this instant!” exclaimed Jenks. As he spoke, he
advanced toward the child with his uplifted hand in a threatening
attitude.

[Illustration: “_Please, Mr. Jenks, don’t sell papa any more liquor._”]

“Please don’t, Mr. Jenks,” persisted the child, not moving or taking
her eyes from the landlord’s countenance. “Mother says if you would not
sell him liquor, there’d be no trouble. He’s kind and good to us all
when he does not drink.”

“Off, I say!” shouted Jenks, now maddened beyond self-control, and his
hand was about to descend upon the little one, when the stranger caught
her in his arms, exclaiming as he did so, with deep emotion:--

“God bless the child! No! no, precious one,” he added, “Don’t fear him.
Plead for your father. Plead for your home. Your petition must prevail.
The merciful Lord cannot say nay to the little ones, whose angels do
always behold the face of their Father in Heaven. God bless the child!”
added the stranger, in a choking voice. “Oh, that the father, for whom
she has come on this touching errand, were present now! If there was
anything of manhood yet left in him, this would awaken it from its
palsied sleep.”

“Papa! O papa!” the child exclaimed, stretching forth her hand. In the
next moment she was clinging to the breast of her father, who, with his
arms clasped tightly around her, stood weeping and mingling his tears
with those of his child.

An oppressive stillness reigned in the room! Jenks stood subdued and
bewildered, his state of mental confusion scarcely enabling him to
comprehend the full import of the scene, and the stranger looked on
wonderingly, yet deeply affected.

Quietly, and with moist eyes, the two or three customers, who had
been lounging at the bar, went stealthily out; and the landlord, the
stranger, and the father and the child, were left the only inmates of
the room.

[Illustration]

“Come, Lizzie, dear! this is no place for us,” said Leslie, breaking
the dead silence. “We’ll go home.” And the unhappy father took his
child by the hand, and led her toward the door.

But the little one held back. “Wait, papa, wait,” she said: “he hasn’t
promised, yet. Oh, I wish he would promise!”

“Promise her, in heaven’s name!” exclaimed the stranger.

“If I do promise, I keep it!” returned the landlord, in a threatening
tone.

“Then, in the name of mercy, do promise,” begged Leslie, in a
despairing voice; “promise, and I’m safe!”

“Be it so! May I be cursed, if ever I sell you a drop of drink at this
bar, while I am landlord!” Jenks spoke with an angry emphasis.

“God be thanked!” murmured the poor drunkard, as he led his child away.
“God be thanked! There is hope for me yet.”

Hardly had Mrs. Leslie missed her child ere she entered, leading
her father by the hand. “O mother!” she exclaimed, with a joy-lit
countenance and a voice of exultation, “Mr. Jenks has promised!”

“Promised what?” Hope sprang up in the mother’s heart; her face
flushed, then grew pale.

“That he would never sell me another glass of liquor,” replied the
husband.

A pair of thin, white hands were clasped together; an ashen face was
turned upward; tearful eyes looked their thankfulness in Heaven.

“There is hope yet,” said Leslie.

“Hope, hope! And, O Edward, you have said the word. I know you will
be a man once more now! Surely, God sent our child on that errand of
love! Innocence has triumphed over vice and cruelty. Our child came to
the strong, evil, passionate man, and in her weakness and innocence,
prevailed over him. God made her fearless and eloquent.”

A year afterward, a stranger came that way, and stopped at the same old
tavern. As before, Jenks was behind his well-filled bar, and drinking
customers came and went in numbers.

Jenks did not recognize the stranger until he called for water, and
drank a full tumbler of the pure liquid with a hearty zest. Then he
knew him, but feigned to be ignorant of his identity.

The stranger made no reference to the scene he had witnessed twelve
months before, but lingered in the barroom most of the day, closely
observing every one who came there to drink. Leslie was not among the
number.

“What has become of the man and the little girl that I saw here at my
last visit to Milanville?” the stranger questioned.

“Gone to the devil, for all I care,” was the landlord’s rude answer as
he hastily left the barroom.

“Do you see that little white cottage away off there, just at the edge
of the wood?” replied one of the customers. “A row of tall poplars
stand in front. The young man you ask for lives there. And what is
more, if he keeps on the way he has begun, the cottage will be his own
in another year.”

“Ah! I see; well, did the young man Leslie ever again try to get a
drink here, since the landlord promised never to let him have another?”

“Twice to my knowledge.”

“And he refused him?”

“Yes; if you remember, Jenks said, in his anger, ‘May I be cursed if I
sell him another drop.’ That saved Leslie. Jenks is superstitious in
some things. Once he drove Leslie from the barroom, threatening, at the
same time, to horsewhip him if he ever set foot inside his house again.”

“Ah! sometimes God makes even the wrath of man to praise Him,” replied
the stranger reverently.

[Illustration]




ONLY THE HUSK


[Illustration: “_I will have the kernel, his wife may have the husk._”]

Tom Darcy, yet a young man, had grown to be a very hard one. Although
naturally kind-hearted, active, and intelligent, he lacked strength
of will to resist temptation and had therefore fallen a victim to
intemperance.

He had lost his position as foreman of a great machine shop, and what
money he now earned came from odd jobs of tinkering which he was able
to do at private houses here and there; for Tom was a genius as well
as a mechanic, and when his head was steady enough, he could mend a
clock or clean a watch, as well as he could set up and regulate a steam
engine, and this latter he could do better than any man ever employed
by the Scott Falls Manufacturing Company.

One day Tom was engaged to mend a broken mowing machine and reaper,
for which he received five dollars; and, on the following morning,
he started for his old haunt, the village tavern. He knew that his
wife sadly needed the money, and that his two little children were
absolutely suffering for want of clothing; so that morning he held a
debate with his better nature, but his better nature had become weak,
and the demon of appetite carried the day.

So, away to the tavern Tom went, where, for two or three hours he felt
the exhilarating effect of the strong drink and fancied himself happy
because he could laugh and sing. He drank while he could stand, then
lay down in a corner where his companions left him.

It was almost midnight, when the landlord’s wife came to the barroom to
see what kept her husband up, and she quickly saw Tom.

“Peter,” said she, “why don’t you send that miserable Tom Darcy home?
He’s been hanging around here long enough.”

Tom’s stupefaction was not sound sleep. The dead coma had left his
brain, and the calling of his name stung his senses to keen attention.
He had an insane love for rum, but he did not love the landlord.

Long years ago, Peter Tinder and Tom Darcy had wooed the same
maiden,--Ellen Goss,--and Tom had won her, leaving Peter to take up
with the sharp-tempered damsel who had brought him the tavern. Tom knew
well enough that even lately Peter Tinder had gloated over the misery
of the woman who had once discarded him.

“Why don’t you send him home?” demanded Mrs. Tinder, with an impatient
stamp of her foot.

“Hush, Betsey, he’s got money. Let him be, and he’ll be sure to spend
it before he goes home. I’ll have the kernel of that nut and his wife
may have the husk.”

Betsey turned away, and shortly afterward Tom Darcy lifted himself upon
his elbow.

“Ah, Tom, are you awake?”

“Yes.”

“Then rouse up and have a warm glass.”

Tom got upon his feet and steadied himself.

“No, I won’t drink any more to-night.”

[Illustration: “_We’ll see!_”]

“It won’t hurt you, Tom,--just one glass.”

“I know it won’t!” said Tom, buttoning up his coat by the solitary
button left. “I know it won’t.”

The air was damp and cold, but Tom Darcy didn’t mind it. The fact was,
he was waking up at last. The words of Peter Tinder were sounding in
his ears. He would go home at once. Why had he not gone before? he
wondered, as he stepped out into the dimly lighted street.

Tom stopped a moment and looked up at the stars and then looked down
upon the earth.

“Ay,” he muttered, grinding his heel into the gravel, “Peter Tinder
is taking the kernel, and leaving poor Ellen the worthless husk,--a
husk more than worthless. I am robbing my wife of joy; robbing my poor
children of honor and comfort, and robbing myself of love and life, so
that Peter Tinder may have the kernel and Ellen the husk. We’ll see!”

It was a revelation to the man. The saloon-keeper’s speech, meant not
for his ears, had fallen upon his senses as fell the voice of the Risen
One upon the ears of Saul of Tarsus.

“We’ll see!” he repeated, setting his foot firmly upon the ground; and
then he wended his way homeward.

On the following morning he said to his wife, “Ellen, have you any
coffee in the house?”

“Yes, Tom.” She did not tell him that her sister had given it to her.
She was glad to hear him ask for coffee, instead of the old, old cider.

“I wish you would make me a cup, good and strong.”

There was really music in Tom’s voice, and his wife set about her work
with a strange flutter at her heart.

Tom ate a light breakfast,--there was not much left to eat in the
house,--and then went out, with a resolute step, and walked straight to
the great manufactory, where he found Mr. Scott in his office.

“Mr. Scott, I want to learn my trade over again.”

“Eh, Tom, what do you mean?”

“I mean that it’s Tom Darcy come back to the old place, asking
forgiveness for the past, and hoping to do better in the future.”

“Tom,” cried the manufacturer, starting forward and grasping his hand,
“are you in earnest? Is it really the old Tom?”

“It’s what’s left of him, sir, and we’ll have him whole and strong very
soon, if you’ll only set him to work.”

“Work! Ay, Tom, and bless you, too. There is an engine to be set up and
tested to-day. Come with me.”

Tom’s hands were weak and unsteady, but his brain was clear, and under
his skillful supervision the engine was set up and tested; but it was
not perfect. There were mistakes which he had to correct, and it was
late in the evening when the work was complete.

“How is it now, Tom?” asked Mr. Scott, as he came into the testing
house and found the workmen ready to go home.

“She’s all right now, sir. You may give your warrant without fear.”

“God bless you, Tom! You don’t know how like music the old voice
sounds. Will you take your old place again?”

“Wait till Monday morning, sir. If you will offer it to me then, I will
take it.”

At the little cottage, Ellen Darcy’s fluttering heart was sinking. That
morning, after Tom had gone, she had found a dollar bill in the coffee
cup.

She knew that he had left it for her. She had been out and bought
potatoes and sugar and flour and butter and a little basket of
strawberries. All day long a ray of light had been dancing and
glimmering before her,--a ray from the blessed light of other days.
With prayer and hope she had set the tea-table and waited; but the sun
went down and no Tom came. Eight o’clock, and almost nine.

[Illustration: “_I kept you waiting, Nellie_”]

Hark? The old step! quick, strong, eager, yes, it was Tom, with the old
grime upon his hands and the odor of oil upon his clothing.

“I have kept you waiting, Nellie.”

“Tom!”

“I did not mean to, but the work hung on.”

“Tom! Tom! You have been to the old shop!”

“Yes, and I’m promised the old place, and--”

“Oh, Tom!”

And she threw her arms around his neck and pressed a kiss upon his lips.

“Nellie, darling, wait a little, and you shall have the old Tom back
again!”

“Oh, I have him now! God bless you, my husband!”

It was a banquet--that supper--with the bright angels of peace and love
and joy spreading their wings over the board.

On the following Monday morning, Tom Darcy resumed his place at the
head of the great machine shop, and those who thoroughly knew him had
no fear of his going back into the slough of dissipation.

A few days later, Tom met Peter Tinder on the street.

“Eh, Tom, old boy, what’s up?”

“_I’m_ up,--right side up!”

“Yes, I see; but I hope you haven’t forsaken us, Tom!”

“I have forsaken only the evil, Peter. The fact is, I concluded that my
wife and little ones had fed on ‘husks’ long enough, and if there was
any goodness left in my heart or in my manhood, it was high time they
had the benefit.”

“Ah! you heard what I said to my wife that night.”

“Yes, Peter, and I shall be grateful to you as long as I live. My
remembrance of you will always be relieved by that tinge of brightness.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Ten years passed away. Peter Tinder had removed to a distant state.
Long ago people had ceased declaring that Tom Darcy “would be as drunk
as a fiddler before long.”

The little cottage had been exchanged for a larger and more commodious
home on one of the pleasantest streets. The two children, Paul and
Emily, were growing to be a great help and comfort to their parents.

But you will want to know what became of Peter Tinder, the saloon
keeper, into whose tills a large share of Tom Darcy’s hard-earned money
had found its way in the old days.

One bitter cold evening in mid-winter, the Darcy family sat around
their cozy fireside. Suddenly the door bell rang. Gentle Mrs. Darcy,
grown more sympathetic and charitable with the passing of the years,
hurried to open the door. But she stepped back with a look of mingled
pity and terror in her eyes.

There stood the most wretched creature she had ever seen. Trembling
with the cold and covered with rags, he undertook to make known his
errand:--

“Is this the home of Tom Darcy?”

By this time Tom was on his feet. “Come in, come in, man, don’t stand
out there, when there’s warmth inside; come right in, my poor fellow.”

“I don’t suppose you know me, Tom Darcy, or perhaps you wouldn’t be so
cordial,” shivered the stranger, turning his bleared eyes toward his
host.

There was something in the voice, which made Tom Darcy start:--

“Why, Ellen, wife, it’s Pete,--Mr. Tinder! Why, man, where did you come
from? What has happened?”

“Ah, it’s many a year since anyone has called me _Mr._ Tinder--‘Old
Pete’--that’s the name I answer to _now-a-days_. I don’t live
anywhere,--I just wander till I find someone that’ll take me in for the
night.”

While Ellen Darcy prepared a cup of hot milk and a large sandwich, “Old
Pete” continued:--

“I heard you lived here, and that you were a Christian, Tom, and
I reckoned you’d not turn me out to-night, though I never did you
anything but evil,--I took the ‘kernel’ and you kept the ‘husk’ a long
time, but things have turned about now. My wife died directly after we
had left the old place, and then people began to say that “Old Pete”
was his own best customer.

“I drank and drank until everything was gone. I often thought about the
‘husk’ and the ‘kernel,’ but I _must have the drink, Tom_, as long as I
live, and that won’t be long, please God.”

Tom Darcy and his good wife made the poor wretch as comfortable as
possible for the night, and entreated him to reform. But it was too
late. “Old Pete” had fed upon “husks” too long. Like the prisoner of
Chillon he had learned to love the very chains which bound him.

As the wretched man started off toward the nearest saloon in the
village, Tom Darcy watched him with a strange fascination until the
fluttering rags had passed around the corner.

“But for the grace of God, Ellen,” he said, humbly, “I would be in his
condition to-day, while you and the children--”

Tom shuddered, while Ellen quoted tearfully:--

“‘No drunkard shall inherit the kingdom of God.’”

[Illustration]




THE SERPENT IN THE HOME


[Illustration]

In all the town there was no brighter or more attractive girl than Miss
Martin. Her elder sister had married one of the doctors of the place,
and she came on a visit to her, and as was right and fitting, they
enjoyed themselves by visiting places of interest together.

One day, while visiting a neighboring city, they stepped into a
fashionable restaurant to rest and take refreshments. As it was a hot
day, the sandwich was followed, at Dr. Black’s suggestion, by a glass
of wine.

Chemists tell us of the affinity of certain substances.

Dr. and Mrs. Black drank their glass of wine without any apparent
effect. But it was different with Miss Martin. She had never drunk
a whole glass of wine in all her life, and something in her system,
I know not what or how, answered to its subtle qualities, and she
felt its exhilarating effect. A pleasing, indescribable sensation
came over her. Before, she was worn out and exhausted; now she felt
light, vigorous, and happy. It is to constitutions of this kind, that
stimulants are an unspeakable temptation.

Favoring circumstances, I grieve to say, were not wanting. Mrs. Black’s
callers were numerous, and wine and cake were regularly presented.
They were asked to dinner and supper parties to get acquainted in the
neighborhood, and at most of these parties wine was served, and just
because other people took it, Miss Martin did so too.

She thought the place delightful and the people exceedingly pleasant;
and if, in a forenoon, she felt exhausted and nervous after an
evening’s party, a glass of wine put her all right.

No wonder that, when she returned to her home, life seemed dull, flat,
and heavy. She used to awake in the morning with a bright, cheery
feeling, and begin to lay out her plan of work for the day. But things
of an ordinary kind had no interest for her now. She became restless,
her appetite failed, and she grew pale and thin.

Her mother, anxious and alarmed, called in the doctor, whose verdict
was, “A little out of sorts--trying season of the year--liver dull--a
little stimulant will set all to rights.” Her father, good, confiding
man, at once ordered in a dozen bottles of port wine, which was to be
administered to the patient twice a day.

[Illustration: _The Doctor’s Prescription_]

And so the flame was fanned and cherished, which in due time,--but I
must not anticipate.

As I have said, Miss Martin was a very prepossessing girl, admired by
many; so in a little while, when on a second visit to her sister, no
one was surprised when it was announced that she was to be married to
one who stood high in the opinion of all, and who was, indeed, a young
man of great worth and excellence.

It happened that winter that a Young Men’s Mutual Improvement Society,
a Scientific Association, and a Total Abstinence Society were organized
in the town.

Now, into the first two of these, Dr. Black and Mr. Bennet, his
intended brother-in-law, entered readily, and were quite willing to
attend meetings, give readings, and deliver lectures; but as for a
temperance society,--really, they saw no need.

“It seems almost an insult to introduce such a society among
respectable people. No doubt there are many who should not drink
because they cannot stop in time, and in such cases drink is a great
curse; but with us, it is different.” And when Mr. Bennet saw Miss
Martin sipping her glass of wine, he thought as of everything else
about her, how graceful it seemed, and how well the action became her.
It was but a few months after their marriage that the poor illusion was
dispelled.

One day some friends of Mr. Bennet’s had come to make them a visit, and
a few neighbors had been asked to meet them at dinner.

The little entertainment was a great success. Finally Mrs. Bennet left
her guests in the dining room, over their wine; she had intended to
be gone but a moment; but when seated by herself, with the excitement
over, a feeling of excessive fatigue and languor came upon her. As
on other occasions, she at once thought of a glass of wine. This was
just the very time it was needed! So without further consideration,
she drank one glass after another, till before she knew it, she was
sleeping the sleep of a drunkard in her own elegant drawing room.

[Illustration]

By-and-by the door was thrown open, and Mr. Bennet, in his usual cheery
voice, said, “Here we are, Mary, all ready for your nice cup of coffee.”

But, alas! there was no answering greeting, nothing but an inarticulate
sound from the prostrate form on the rug. The company took in the
situation but too well, and all retired as gracefully as possible,
“sorry to see Mrs. Bennet so poorly,” etc.

Mr. Bennet was bewildered. Of all the possibilities in life, this was
the last that could have occurred to him; and there he sat, with that
terrible, mysterious smile upon his face, which you may have seen on
the face of a strong man when shame and agony were gnawing at his heart.

It would be tedious to record Mrs. Bennet’s resolutions of amendment
made and broken, to be again renewed with the same result. Her
husband’s patience was often abused, but still he was always so ready
to forgive.

But the most long-suffering patience may be worn out at last, and it
seemed to Mr. Bennet that the only chance was to send his wife--once
his pride, as well as his joy--to one of those asylums for the
drunkard, called “refuges.” The arrangements were made, and the day on
which she was to go appointed.

I shall never forget that afternoon. The poor husband was utterly
prostrated by grief and shame by an outbreak of his wife the day
before, and, as an old friend, he requested me to accompany her, for he
could not trust himself, and feared his resolution would give way at
the parting scene.

She, poor creature, not only acquiesced in the plan, but earnestly
besought her husband on her knees to help her to get free from the
wretched slavery in which she lived. It is easy for people outside to
speak, but I do think that the wretched slave to strong drink is to be
pitied.

Poor Mrs. Bennet had been for some months in this establishment, when
her husband, hoping against hope, removed to the city of which I have
spoken, with a view of giving her new scenes and new surroundings in
her future life, and brought her home. How he congratulated himself;
how his love and long-slumbering reverence revived, as week after week
passed, and still she stood the trial!

Some time after this I was invited to the marriage of their only
daughter. She was one of whom any mother might have been proud, and on
whom her father doted.

[Illustration: “_At evening time it shall be light._”]

I had been greatly gratified at hearing of my friend’s continued
reformation. When I arrived that summer evening, I found the three
sitting together on the lawn under a spreading tree, enjoying the
sweetest hour of all the day. The outward scene seemed a fitting symbol
of the inward peace, and I caught myself whispering, “At evening time
it shall be light.”

Looking back on the past, it seemed as if we had awakened from a
fearful nightmare, and were being reassured by the calm and peace of
returning morning.

Next day, as the wedding guests were strolling through the grounds
after the marriage, till lunch was announced, and everything seemed
the embodiment of calmness and comfort, he would have been thought a
hard-hearted prophet of evil who would have predicted the events of the
following hours.

I stepped aside and went into the house to see if I could be of any
assistance in the finishing of the arrangements. On looking into the
dining room, what was my amazement to find the table furnished with a
profusion of wines and brandies!

Thinking there must have been some strange mistake, I hurried out and
sought Mr. Bennet, to whom I told what I had seen, suggesting that his
orders must surely have been misunderstood.

For a moment, a look of surprise came into his face. “Not at all,”
said he; “you do not suppose I could let such an occasion as this pass
without giving it all the honors?”

“Honors!”

I thought some people had strange ideas about honors. I implored him
to alter his arrangements even yet. “Thanks,” said he, “for your kind
interest; but pray don’t trouble yourself, you will see that all will
go off well.” And then, in a lower tone, “Mary has promised me.”

With a sorrowful heart, I turned away. The party had not been long
in the dining room, when I saw Mrs. Bennet, who had hitherto been
acting the part of hostess with all the ease and grace, which in her
early days had charmed so many, become suddenly pale, and seemed to be
putting a strong restraint upon herself. I felt deeply grieved when I
saw those around her carelessly sipping their wine, ignorant of the
fierce war they were kindling within her.

At last she could restrain herself no longer; it seemed as if a
thunderbolt had fallen among us, when suddenly she rose, and seizing a
bottle, darted to the door.

Mr. Bennet’s face turned ashy pale, and when he attempted to rise,
his knees smote against each other, like the monarch of old when
the handwriting on the wall announced his doom. When I got outside
the door, the poor woman looked round on me with a half-triumphant,
half-scared expression, and the brandy bottle was lying empty beside
her.

I helped her to the bed, and the doctor was sent for; but no human
power could save her. As we watched her tossing to and fro, wildly
appealing for protection from the fiery serpents which she averred were
swarming around her, I wondered if her husband did not ask himself if
he had fulfilled that vow made long ago, of loving, cherishing, and
_protecting_ her, when he exposed her to that which was indeed the
supremest danger possible,--the very smell of what, to her, was deadly
poison.

[Illustration: “_They shall thirst no more_”]

At length the storm subsided; she lay wan and worn on her pillow.
Leaning over her, I heard in a low whisper the words, “_they shall
thirst no more_.” The pathos was inexpressible. These were her last
words. No doubt there is pardon for the penitent drunkard as well as
for the penitent thief, even at the eleventh hour; but turning away
from that deathbed, I could but say, “Let me die the death of the
righteous, and let my last end be like his.”

I have spoken of some of the outward incidents of Mrs. Bennet’s
history, but who shall imagine her inner life? I am sure that the most
exquisite tortures ever invented, fell very far short of those endured
by this poor woman.

When bidding good-by to the silent and mournful mansion, where all had
but the other day seemed so bright and happy, I felt with new emphasis
the force of the wise man’s words, “Look not thou upon the wine when
it is red, when it giveth his color in the cup, when it moveth itself
aright. At last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us turn to the stern lesson woven all through the warp and woof
of the foregoing story,--of a young life ruined and a home broken up
as the result of the social wineglass. Social custom and “treating”
are responsible for more drunkards’ graves than many are willing to
acknowledge.

But who will speak for the brewer and distiller who institute open
“missionary” campaigns to teach the children to drink that they
may fill the breaks in the ranks caused by the passing of the old
inebriates? God says to such:--

“Woe unto him that giveth his neighbor drink, that putteth the bottle
to him, and maketh him drunken also.”




WORK DONE INSIDE


[Illustration]

One of my friends is a very earnest, shrewd man, who seems to know how
to do the best thing at the right time. One day he was passing a gin
shop in Manchester, England, when he saw a drunken man lying on the
ground. The poor fellow had evidently been turned out of doors when all
his money was gone. In a moment my friend hastened across the street,
and entering a grocer’s shop, asked the clerk:--

“Will you oblige me with the largest sheet of paper you have?”

“What for, my friend? What’s the matter?”

“Oh! you shall see in a moment or two. Please get me the largest sheet
you have.”

The sheet of paper was soon brought.

“Now, will you lend me a piece of chalk?”

My friend then quickly printed, in large letters, these
words:--“_SPECIMEN OF THE WORK DONE INSIDE._”

He then fastened the paper onto the drunken man, and retired a short
distance. In a few moments several passers-by stopped to read the
notice, and in a short time a crowd assembled; then the saloon keeper,
hearing the noise and laughter outside, came out to see what it was
about. He eagerly bent down and read the inscription on the paper, and
then demanded in an angry voice:--

“Who did that?”

“Which?” asked my friend, who now joined the crowd. “If you mean what
is written on the paper, I DID THAT; but if you mean the man, YOU DID
THAT! This morning when he arose, he was sober; when he walked down
the street, on his way to work, he was sober; when he went into your
shop, he was sober; and now he is what you made him. Is he not a true
specimen of the work done inside?”

[Illustration]




NAT RAYMOND’S VICTORY AND WHAT CAME OF IT


[Illustration]

Oh, but I’ll have the jolliest time, though! I’m going out to Uncle
Nathan’s, Christmas!” and Nat Raymond threw his cap high in the air.
“Uncle Nathan’s just splendid; I was named after him, wasn’t I mother?”

Nat was too excited and delighted to wait for his mother to reply, and
he continued:--

“I’m going to be a sailor, too, some day, mother, just like Uncle
Nathan. I shall ask him to tell me all about the time when his ship got
frozen in, up among the funny Esquimaux. And besides, I want him to
tell me about those great big, furry dogs that used to draw him over
the snow.

“Uncle Nathan’s a great man,--don’t you think so, mother? and of course
he’s just the _best_ man!”

Nat paused at last, not so much because he really cared for his mother
to answer him, but the fact was, he was quite out of breath.

“Yes, dear, your uncle is a kind-hearted man, but I am so sorry to
say, he has _one_ bad habit. I’ve tried to reason with him again and
again, but he seems to think he has the best of the argument. No, Nat,
I shall not tell you what the habit is,--you will find out soon enough
after you get there, I’m afraid. But I’m going to trust my boy to the
promptings of his own conscience; for I am sure he will be brave enough
to do what he knows to be right. Only, Nat, my boy, whenever you are
tempted to do wrong, never forget to lift up your heart to God for help
and for courage to do the right. And don’t forget that even a boy may
sometimes be able to do great good by his example.”

Nat was somewhat mystified, but soon forgot all about his mother’s
conversation, in the excitement of preparing for the journey.

At last Christmas came; and Nat found himself aboard the flying
train. His uncle was at the train to meet him, and what a welcome he
received! Everyone seemed glad to see him, and to be anxious to give
him a pleasant visit. Uncle Nathan lived near the sea, and oh, how Nat
loved the sea! It seemed that he would never tire watching the great
white-caps toss and foam and chase each other to the pebbly beach.

When supper was ready, Nat’s place was beside his uncle. Now Nat was a
strict temperance boy; he wore the blue-ribbon badge very proudly, for
he had signed the pledge. So when several bottles of wine were brought
in and placed on the table, he looked inquiringly into his uncle’s face.

“Oh, it’s all right, my lad; it can’t hurt you a bit. You see, you
need it, after the long, cold ride, to warm you up!”

“But don’t you see my blue ribbon, Uncle Nathan? I’ve signed the
pledge, and I can’t drink wine.”

“Oh! but I think it’s quite ridiculous for a little shaver like you to
sign the pledge, like some old toper!” and Uncle Nathan leaned back in
his chair and laughed.

Poor Nat’s face grew very red. He did not like to be called a “little
shaver”--because he was twelve years old. And besides he _did_ hate to
have Uncle Nathan laugh at him. He wondered if it _would_ do any harm
_just once_ to taste of a small glass of wine with his uncle.

Then quick as a flash he remembered his mother’s words. Ah, so _this_
must be the bad habit to which she had referred.

“Come,” insisted Uncle Nathan, moving the sparkling liquid a little
nearer his plate. “Come, Nat, be a man! you ought to be able to drink a
little wine without getting drunk!”

Now Nat’s one ambition was to be a man. Maybe Uncle Nathan was right
after all.

“Even a boy may sometimes do great good by his example;” these were his
mother’s words. How plainly he remembered them! Nat’s resolution was
quickly formed. He wavered no longer.

“I’ve signed the pledge, Uncle Nathan, and if I can’t be a man without
breaking my word, why, I suppose I’ll have to be a boy, then, as long
as I live!”

Nat had a pretty hard fight before he could bring himself to oppose
Uncle Nathan in this manner, but the voice of conscience was growing
louder every moment, and with a silent prayer to Heaven for help to do
right, Nat continued:--

“I tell you this, Uncle Nathan, if everybody would sign the pledge and
keep it, there would be no drunkards any more, and there would be fewer
prisons and poor-houses, and ever so much less misery in the world;
that’s what my father says.”

The longer Nat thought about it, and the more he said, the stronger
grew his conviction that he was doing right.

Uncle Nathan only smiled and gently patted Nat’s shoulders. “Good boy;
good boy,” he smiled, “but we will see how you hold out.”

One evening they were all going on a sleigh ride to the country to
listen to a speech from a very noted gentleman. The evening was a
bitter cold one, and the crisp snow sparkled like diamonds as the
bright moonlight fell upon it.

[Illustration: _Sleigh Ride to the Temperance Lecture_]

“Come, my lad,” said Uncle Nathan, just as they were ready to start,
“it’s a stinging evening. Here’s a little glass of sweetened toddy for
you, just to keep you warm. I’ve had a nice glass, and I feel better
and warmer already.”

“I’m good and warm now, Uncle Nathan, and I don’t need it. Besides,
that stuff doesn’t keep people warm,--it makes them cold. My father
says he saw a man who froze to death just because he’d taken too much
of that kind of stuff. When I have to die, Uncle Nathan, I don’t mean
to die that way.”

Uncle Nathan smiled a little, called Nat a stubborn lad, and they all
drove away.

Oh! how Nat _did_ hope that the great gentleman whom they were going
to hear, would say a few words--just a few at least--in favor of
temperance; for Nat felt as if he needed a little help. He was tired of
standing alone, as he thought. But if we are doing right, we are never
alone. God is on our side, and His holy angels are with us.

Much to Nat’s delight, the speaker gave most of the evening to
explaining the evils of intemperance. He told of the misery and
wretchedness caused by the liquor traffic. He spoke of the bright,
promising young men of the nation, who were being led away from purity
and right, and held in the hateful bondage of the cup. He spoke
feelingly of the thousands of widows and tens of thousands of poor
orphans all over our fair land, whose husbands and fathers had been
murdered by the demon--drink.

At the close of his lecture, the speaker presented the Pledge. And
what was Nat’s delight, when he saw his Uncle Nathan walk to the desk
and sign his name,--and hark! Nat could hardly believe his ears! What
_was_ Uncle Nathan saying? What _did_ he mean? Was it actually true?

“I have been much interested in the lecture this evening,” began Uncle
Nathan, “and am glad to place my name on the Pledge. I only wish it had
been there long ago. As I have said, the lecture of the evening has
been good; but friends, the greatest temperance lecture I ever listened
to, has been given to me and acted out every day for the past week, by
my young nephew, Nat Raymond. He is here to-night, and I wish to tell
him that his influence, more than anything else in the world, has led
me to take this stand.”

[Illustration: _Uncle Nathan Signs the Pledge_]

“Hurrah for Nat Raymond!” broke out a dozen sturdy voices. And before
he fairly understood what was going on, Nat found himself quite a hero.

At last, when his visit at Uncle Nathan’s was over, and Nat was again
at home, he told the story over and over to his happy parents.

“I never would have had the courage to refuse to take the wine with
Uncle Nathan, mother,” he declared, “if I had not remembered what you
whispered in my ear the last thing before I left you: ‘_Don’t forget,
my son, that even a boy may be able to do great good by his example._’”

       *       *       *       *       *

“We can trace four-fifths of the crimes committed to the influence of
rum.”--_Judge Allison._

“No business more thoroughly demoralizing, more destructive of public
morals, public order, and public decency.”--_Judge John Martin._

“Seventy-five percent of the crimes of New York City are due directly
or indirectly to strong drink.”--_I. Kenny Ford, New York Police Court._

“Seventy-five percent of accidents to life and limb due directly to
drink.”--_Dr. Cyrus Edson._

“The undoubted cause of four-fifths of all the crime, pauperism, and
domestic misery of the State.”--_Governor Dix, of New York._

“The chief source and immediate cause of more hurt to society and to
individuals than any other agency.”--_Hon. H. W. Blair._

“The original cause of most of the enormities committed by
criminals.”--_Sir Matthew Hale._




TOM’S TEMPERANCE LECTURE


[Illustration]

Twas a bright autumn morning. The fall term of St. Rudolph’s school had
begun on Wednesday. Out on the playground, Tom Hadden,--a boy who had
arrived only the night before,--was standing by himself, and looking
about with the curious but sober eyes of a boy who felt as if he were
in a new world, and who was as yet extremely doubtful as to his chances
for happiness in that world.

“Hello, Tom Hadden; is that you?” some one called suddenly.

Tom’s gloomy face brightened, and he turned eagerly toward a group
of boys near him, who were talking and laughing in the manner so
expressive at once of good comradeship and much self-importance,--a
common characteristic of the older students at the beginning of a new
school year.

Tom knew several of those boys; he had met them during the summer
vacations, and their greetings now were so hearty that in a few minutes
he forgot that he was that forlorn creature, a strange boy in a large
school; and he gladly accepted an invitation to join his new friends
after school hours, in a tramp over the hills to a village a short
distance from St. Rudolph’s.

In high spirits they set out; the hills were crossed, and they soon
reached the village.

“Now for Cruger’s,” shouted several of the boys as they led the way to
a saloon and boisterously pushed open the door.

Tom held back. He did not like the appearance of the place.

“What are we going in here for?” he asked.

“For a spread, of course,” one of the boys explained. “They cook great
dinners here; come on.”

Tom was quite ready for a “spread,” and willingly followed the boys
into a little back room where the saloon proprietor assured them they
would be undisturbed. Their dinner was soon served, and thoroughly
enjoyed by the hungry boys; then a dessert of fruit, cake, and pie was
ordered, and when the last crumb of the last cake had disappeared, and
the waiter had removed the dishes from the table, Frank Jones, their
acknowledged leader, said gayly:--

“Now, fellows, before we go, we’ll have a loving cup.”

“A loving cup? what’s that?” Tom asked of the boy nearest him.

“You needn’t be afraid of it, it won’t hurt you; it’s only beer,” the
boy answered.

“Beer? I don’t want any,” and Tom pushed back his chair.

“Sit still; you can’t go yet,” said Frank Jones, and at that moment the
waiter returned with the black bottles of beer.

Amid shouts of laughter the corks were drawn, and then one of the boys
started the song:--

    “And here’s a hand, my trusty friend,
        A gie’s a hand o’ thine,
    And we’ll take a right guid willie-wought,--”

“No, no,” protested Tom Hadden earnestly, “this is wrong. I will not
drink. Let me go.”

The boys stopped singing. “So you are a kill-sport, are you?” one of
them said scornfully.

“No, no,” Tom cried, “but I can’t drink. Let me go.”

The beer was foaming in their glasses, but the boys left it untouched,
while they stared at Tom.

“You are a fool, Tom,” one of them said. “What harm can a glass of beer
do you?”

“Come, Tom,” coaxed another, “don’t make a row about nothing; be a man
and drink your beer.”

“I won’t,” Tom said sharply. “Let me go.”

“We aren’t quite ready to let you go yet,” Frank Jones said angrily.
“You are a pretty fellow to kill sport in this way; and now if you
won’t drink, you shall give us a temperance lecture. If it is wrong to
drink beer, you shall tell us why. Come, boys, pay attention. You will
now listen to an address on temperance from the eloquent orator, Thomas
Hadden.”

“Hear! Hear!” shouted the boys derisively, and one of them called:
“Stand him up on the table.”

[Illustration: “_I will tell you a story that belongs to my own life_”]

“Up with you,” cried two of the strongest boys, as they seized Tom,
and, unable to resist, he was forced to mount the table. With crimson
face and something suspiciously like tears in his eyes, he faced his
tormentors.

“I can’t, boys,” he faltered. “I can’t talk to you.”

“More shame to you, then, for spoiling our fun,” growled one of the
boys. “Come, you needn’t think we’ll let you off. If you won’t drink
beer, you shall give us some good reason for not drinking it. That’s
only fair. Come, be quick about it.”

Tom Hadden waited a moment. Once or twice he swallowed hard, and
his breath came in quick gasps. Suddenly he threw back his head and
straightened himself.

“Boys,” he said, in a clear voice, “I will tell you a story--a story
that belongs to my own life.”

“All right,” said Frank Jones recklessly, but something in Tom’s face
made the other boys watch him in silence.

“Boys,” Tom went on, in a tender, pathetic voice, “I knew a little boy
once who had a beautiful home. He had a kind father and mother, and he
loved them both so much that he could never tell which he loved the
best.

“That little boy’s father had always been a good man; but once, when
he wasn’t well, the doctor ordered him to drink beer, and he began to
drink it, and--” Tom’s voice was thrilling in its emphasis now--“he
soon began to drink stronger things; and there came a time when that
little boy’s home was so changed from the lovely place it once was,
that it seemed as if a fiend must live there.

“That little boy heard his father rave and curse like a madman,--and he
_was_ mad, for drink had made him so. That boy saw his mother struck
down by his drunken father’s hand.”

There was a dead silence in that little room. The beer had ceased to
foam, but not a boy had tasted it or noticed it.

“Boys,” Tom’s thrilling voice went on, “that little boy is a large boy
now, and he is almost alone in the world, for his father and mother are
both dead, and now he has no home.”

[Illustration: _Tom Hadden’s Vow_]

No boy who heard it ever forgot the pathos of Tom’s tone as he
continued:--

“Do you wonder, boys, that standing by his mother’s grave, that boy
looked up to heaven, and solemnly vowed never while he lived, to touch
or taste the drink that made a madman of his father, ruined his home,
and broke his mother’s heart?”

“You will let me go now,” he said, as he jumped down from his high
place, and started for the door. With a rush, the boys gathered around
him.

“Tom,” said Frank Jones, “you are a hero. Why, I think you are braver
than a soldier. I am proud of you, and I would do just like you if I
were in your place.” The boy stopped; a new thought had come to him. He
looked around on his companions.

“Boys,” he said earnestly, “It seems to me that what I would do if I
were in Tom’s place, I would better do now in my own place.”

Perhaps the head master of St. Rudolph’s was never in his long life
more happily surprised than he was that evening, when six of his
oldest and most influential boys called on him and asked to sign the
temperance pledge.

Years have passed since that evening, and those boys have kept their
pledge.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: “_He played in a quiet and subdued manner as if afraid_”]




A LITTLE CHILD SHALL LEAD THEM


[Illustration]

Two children were playing on a lawn in front of a pleasant cottage.
Roses and honeysuckles climbed up the windows, smooth walks, bordered
with flowers, ran through the lawn; and everything about the cottage
and the grounds had an air of taste and comfort.

A little way off, and very different in appearance, stood another
cottage; the lawn in front was overgrown with weeds, and the walks
with coarse grass. The fence that enclosed the lawn was broken in many
places, and the gate, held only by the lower hinge, stood half open and
awry. No roses or vines hung their green and crimson curtains about the
windows, or clambered up the porch. This cottage had once been white
also, white as that before which the children were playing; but it was
now dirty and soiled and looked forlorn and comfortless.

There was as much difference in the appearance of the children as in
the two cottages. One was neatly and cleanly dressed, and had a happy
face. The clothes of the other were poor and soiled, and his face pale
and sad. One played with hearty enjoyment, laughing and shouting; the
other in a quiet and subdued manner, as if afraid to raise his voice,
in the happy sports of childhood.

“Jim, isn’t that your father?” asked the well-dressed boy, as a man
appeared coming down the road a little way off.

Jim started in a half-scared manner, and turned toward the road. He
stood very still for a moment or two, looking at the man, and then,
with a face now red, and now very pale, hurried away and laid himself
close down upon the grass under some currant bushes, whispering as he
did so, in a choking voice:--

“Don’t, Freddy, please don’t tell him I’m here.”

Light and joy went out of Freddy’s face also. He understood too well
what all this meant.

Staggering down the road came Mr. Harwood, Jim’s father.

What a sight it was! As he drew nearer, Freddy Wilson saw his red and
swollen face, and heard him muttering and cursing to himself, and he
shuddered with horror.

As Mr. Harwood passed the gate, he saw Freddy, and stopped. Freddy
began to tremble. His first thought was to run back to the house; but
he was a brave little boy, and it went against his feelings to run away
from anything. So he did not move.

“Is my boy, Jim, here?” asked Mr. Harwood, in an angry voice. Some men,
when drunk, are always ill-natured and cruel, and Jim’s father was one
of these. Seeing Freddy, and knowing that the two boys played much
together, he naturally thought of his son.

Freddie did not answer. He could not tell a lie, and so he said nothing.

“Did you hear me?” growled Mr. Harwood.

Still Freddy looked at him and said nothing. He knew that if Jim’s
father found him there, he would kick and beat him all the way home.
Not because the child had disobeyed his father, or was in any mischief,
but Mr. Harwood, as I have said, was full of anger and cruelty when
drunk, and took a savage pleasure in abusing his little boy.

Freddy began to be brave now, because he wished to save his little
playmate from harm.

There was a bolt on the inside of the gate near which the child was
standing. With a stealthy motion, he slipped this bolt and fastened the
gate. It was not done an instant too soon, for Mr. Harwood, growing
furious, made a dash toward the boy, and tried to get at him through
the gate.

“You young dog!” he growled, “I’ll teach you manners! Why don’t you
answer me? Where’s Jim?”

The drunken man shook the gate violently, and tried, with his unsteady
hands, to find the bolt on the inside. But his efforts were in vain.
He could not reach the little fellow, who stood up close to him, with
a brave but sorrowful face. “You’d better go home, sir; I’ll tell my
father of this.”

There was a manly firmness in the manner of the child, as well as in
his words, that had their effect upon the drunken man.

“Who cares for your father? I don’t!” he replied, moving back a step or
two from the gate, muttering and cursing.

“But I say, youngster!” and he staggered a little nearer, with a scowl
on his disfigured face, “just answer me one thing. Say yes or no. Is
that young scamp of mine here?”

“I don’t know any young scamp of yours, Mr. Harwood.”

“You don’t, eh! Now that’s cool for a model young gentleman, like
Master Wilson. Don’t you know my Jim?”

“I know your Jim very well,” said Freddie. “But he’s a good little boy,
and not a young scamp; and I don’t think you’re a kind father to call
him such an ugly name.”

This rebuke was felt by Mr. Harwood, drunk as he was. He could not
endure the steady, fearless glance of Freddy’s blue eyes. Then, away
down in his heart, almost covered up and lost, was an old feeling
of fatherly pride, and this was stirred at the praise spoken about
Jim,--“a good little boy.”

The anger went out of Mr. Harwood’s face.

“He was a good little boy once,” said he, with something so like
tenderness in his voice, that Jim, who was lying close by, hidden under
the currant bushes, sobbed aloud.

“What’s that?” asked Mr. Harwood, leaning forward and looking toward
the currant bushes. But the sound was hushed in a moment.

“He’s a good little boy now,” said Freddy, speaking in a very firm
voice and not seeming to hear the sob. “A good little boy,” he
repeated; and added, to make his assertion stronger, “there isn’t a
better one anywhere about here, and you let him go ragged, when he
ought to have good clothes like the rest of us.”

Mr. Harwood didn’t stop to hear anything further, but turned from the
gate and hurried toward the poor cottage across the road, walking more
steadily than he had done a few minutes before. Then Freddy went behind
the currant bushes where Jim still lay on the ground.

“He’s gone,” said Freddy.

The pent up grief in Jim’s sad heart could be restrained no longer. He
burst into a wild fit of crying that continued for several minutes.
Freddy said all that he could to comfort his little friend; and when he
had grown calm, asked with all the earnestness of a grown-up man:--

“Can’t something be done, Jim?”

Jim shook his head in a hopeless way.

“Something ought to be done, and I am sure something _could_ be done,
if we only knew what it was. Oh! isn’t drinking an awful thing!”

“It’s the worst thing in the world,” sobbed Jim. “When father is
sober,” he went on, “he’s just as kind as he can be; but when he’s
drunk--O dear! it’s dreadful to think of.”

“Does he get drunk often?” asked Freddy.

“Now he does. He’s drunk ’most all the time. But it wasn’t so always. O
dear! He used to be so good to us,” he sobbed, “and take us out with
him sometimes, and buy us nice things. He never does now. Most all
of the money he gets, he spends at the tavern. But I must run home.
Mother is almost sick, and father is so cross when he’s been drinking;
and she’s weak and can’t bear it,” and Jim’s tears ran over his cheeks
again.

“Aren’t you afraid he’ll beat you?” asked Freddy.

“May be he will, and may be he won’t,” answered Jim. “But I must not
stop to think of that. Mother is sick and weak, and father will be
cross to her,” and Jim hurried away.

All at once Freddy remembered how his defense and praise of Jim had
cooled Mr. Harwood’s anger, and he said to himself: “May be I can do
some good,--and keep Mr. Harwood from beating poor Jim, or--”

But Freddy didn’t stop to reason the case any longer, but hurried after
his young friend, resolved to face the drunken man again in the hope of
turning away his wrath.

The two lads entered Jim’s poor home together, and stood face to face
with Mr. Harwood.

“O father!” exclaimed Jim, as he saw, with glad surprise, a look of
almost tender pity on his father’s face; and as the child spoke, he
sprang forward and caught his father’s hand, clinging to it tightly.

This was too much for Mr. Harwood, who was not yet sober enough to
control his feelings, and he turned away with a choking sob, trying to
draw his hand out of Jim’s; but the boy would not let go his hold. And
now Freddy spoke out in behalf of his little friend.

“Jim’s a good boy, Mr. Harwood. I know all the boys around here, and
there isn’t one of them better than Jim. Father says so too; and lets
me have him over at our house whenever I please.”

“Who said he wasn’t a good boy,” answered Mr. Harwood, turning around
upon Freddy with a half angry manner. “I’d just like to hear anybody
speak against him, I would.”

[Illustration: “_He sprang forward and caught his father’s hand_”]

And he sat down, drawing Jim between his knees as he spoke.

A pale, thin, half-frightened woman, Jim’s mother, wondering what all
this could mean, came into the room. Her eager eyes ran hurriedly from
face to face.

“Don’t be scared, Ellen,” said Mr. Harwood, “There isn’t anything
wrong. I’m only having a talk with these boys.”

He was almost sober now. Excitement had cleared his stupid brain.
Looking from one to the other of the lads, he could not help noticing
the painful contrast; one so clean and well dressed, the other soiled
and ragged.

He knit his brows closely, and sat very still, like one arguing for
himself.

“I’ll tell you what it is, mother,” said he, turning his eyes toward
Mrs. Harwood, “I’m not going to have our Jim running about, looking
like a beggar’s child. He’s just as good as any of the boys around
here, and I’ll not have him ashamed to be seen with the best of them.
I will drink nothing stronger than coffee, while I live, God being my
helper!”

“Oh, thank God!” exclaimed the poor woman, dropping upon her knees and
clasping her husband’s neck. “Oh, thanks be to God!” she repeated. “He
will be your helper. In Him is all compassion and all strength; but
without Him our poor resolves are as nothing.”

Freddy stood looking on for a little while, greatly moved by what was
passing, then he walked quietly to the door and was going out, when Mr.
Harwood called to him:--

“Just one word before you go. I’m sorry to say it; but it’s in my
thought now, and I feel that it would better come out. May be I
wouldn’t say it another time.”

Freddy stopped and turned toward Mr. Harwood.

“I’m sorry to say it, Freddy, I am, for you are a nice boy, and have
always been good to Jim. But you’ll thank me for it, may be, some of
these days.”

There was something in Mr. Harwood’s manner that sent a feeling of
alarm to Freddy’s heart. He stood still, waiting, every pulse-beat
sounding in his ears.

“May be your father’s head is stronger than mine was five years ago,”
said Mr. Harwood, “but I’ve seen him at the “Black Horse” too often of
late, going on just as I began. It isn’t safe, Freddy! It isn’t safe,
and I don’t like to see him there. Look what I have come to! But there
was a time when I could hold my head as high as Mr. Wilson or anybody
else in the neighborhood.”

[Illustration: “_I will not believe it_”]

Freddy waited to hear no more. It seemed as if night had fallen
suddenly on his young spirit, and as if the air would suffocate him. He
turned and ran wildly away, such a weight and pain in his heart, that
it seemed as if he would die. Mr. Wilson was coming along the road,
and was near his own gate, when he saw Freddy hurrying across from Mr.
Harwood’s cottage, his face white as a sheet and strongly agitated.

“My son! what ails you?” he cried in alarm.

“O father!” was all that Freddy could say, as he stopped before him,
and looked up with a strange, frightened face.

“I will not believe it,” he sobbed, bursting into tears and hiding his
face in his father’s hands. “It’s all a lie of Mr. Harwood’s!”

“Won’t believe what? my boy,--what has happened to grieve you so? A lie
of Mr. Harwood’s? What has that drunken wretch dared to say?” His voice
changed to an angry tone.

“I can’t tell you, father. It would choke me, but it’s all a lie. Oh, I
wish I hadn’t said anything about it! But I felt so miserable, and you
came right on me.”

Mr. Wilson led Freddy within the gate to a seat under one of the trees.

“Now, my son,” he said in a kind, firm voice, “tell me just what Mr.
Harwood said.”

Freddy then related all about the drunken man coming to the gate, and
what had occurred there, and all that he saw and heard when he went
home with Jim, and at last he sobbed out the awful, warning words of
Mr. Harwood.

As Freddy came to this last part, Mr. Wilson turned his face so far
away that his son could not see it; but he felt his father’s arm that
was around him clasp him more tightly. Then Mr. Wilson placed his lips
fondly and with a long pressure, on Freddy’s forehead.

“I will talk with Mr. Harwood about this,” he said in subdued tones, as
they rose and went toward the house.

Mr. Wilson went to see Mr. Harwood that very day. Their interview was
affecting to both, and good for both. The warning words had not come a
moment too soon, and Mr. Wilson felt this so deeply that he could not
be angry with his poor friend.

No one ever saw either of them at the “Black Horse” after that, nor did
they ever again permit the cup of confusion to come near their lips.

[Illustration]




PROHIBITION


There is a cause for the moral paralysis upon society. Our laws sustain
an evil which is sapping their very foundations. Many deplore the
wrongs which they know exist, but consider themselves free from all
responsibility in the matter. This can not be. Every individual exerts
an influence in society. In our favored land, every voter has some
voice in determining what laws shall control the nation. Should not
that influence and vote be on the side of temperance and virtue? The
advocates of temperance fail to do their whole duty unless they exert
their influence, by precept and example, by voice and pen and vote, in
behalf of prohibition and total abstinence. We need not expect that
God will work a miracle to bring about this reform, and thus remove
the necessity for our exertion. We ourselves must grapple this giant
foe, our motto, “No compromise,” and no cessation of our efforts till
victory is gained.--_Mrs. E. G. White._


_Does Prohibition Prohibit?_

“‘Prohibition doesn’t prohibit!’ That phrase has been worn threadbare
by friends of the liquor traffic. They claim that as much liquor
is sold in ‘dry’ districts as in ‘wet.’ Yet they do not look with
indifference upon the strides made by prohibition; they are working
as if the very life of their business depended upon the defeat of
the temperance forces. And it probably does; for every distillery,
brewery, and saloon must have a license before its doors can swing open
for business. In France the liquor dealers found it most profitable to
have no prohibition law; for when the government granted liberty to the
liquor trade, the consumption of alcohol increased nearly one hundred
percent.”--_Temperance Torchlights._


_Some Results of Prohibition_

“I consider the prohibition law in Kansas as worth more to the railroad
men than any other one thing.”--_Superintendent of Santa Fe Railroad._

“The five ‘wettest’ counties of West Virginia have four hundred
fifteen convicts; the other fifty counties have four hundred
thirteen. One-eleventh of the counties furnish one-half of the
convicts.”--_Statistics of 1909._

“There is more hypocritical, illegal selling in license States than
in Maine; for every joint or blind tiger under prohibition in Maine,
there are sixteen blind tigers in licensed New York, plus twenty-seven
thousand State licensed saloons.”--_Mrs. Lillian M. N. Stevens._

“Atlanta, at the end of 1908, showed 3,903 fewer arrests for
drunkenness, and 8,102 fewer arrests for disorderly conduct--200 fewer
juvenile arrests.”--_Mrs. Mary Harris Armor._

“One-third of our counties are without prisoners in their jails
or paupers in their almshouses; one-half of our counties sent _no
convicts_ to our prisons this year, and one-half of our prison inmates
never lived in Kansas long enough to acquire a residence here.
Churches and schools flourish, the spiritual outlook is hopeful, and
the saloon is practically banished.”--_Governor Hoch, of Kansas, in his
Thanksgiving Message._

ATLANTA, GEORGIA.--“For the first time in its fifteen years of
existence, every cell at the police jail yesterday afternoon was empty.
Not a prisoner was incarcerated, and the turnkeys and matrons were
having a very dull afternoon. The police attribute this remarkable
condition to the prohibition law which went into effect the first day
of the year.”--_Washington Times, Jan. 25, 1908._

       *       *       *       *       *

“Without one dollar of revenue from the saloon, Maine has a larger
percentage of the total population in the public schools than any other
of the New England States, or New York, with its twenty million dollars
of revenue from the saloon. It has more teachers employed in proportion
to the school population than any other State.

“It is stated by Lady Henry Somerset that in one district in Liverpool,
England, in which there is no saloon, there is but one pauper to every
one thousand inhabitants. In another district, in which there are two
hundred saloons, there is one pauper to every twenty-eight inhabitants.

“Abyssinia has prohibition, and the penalty for taking liquors
into that country is death. In the capital of the country only two
murders have been committed in the last forty years. Smoking is also
prohibited.”--_Temperance Torchlights._




CIGARETTE POISON


“You smoke thirty cigarettes a day?”

“Yes, on the average.”

“Are they to blame for your run-down condition?”

“Not in the least. I blame my hard work.”

The physician then took a leech out of a glass jar.

“Let me show you something,” he said. “Bare your arm.”

The cigarette fiend bared his pale arm, and the other laid the lean,
black leech upon it. The leech fell to work busily, its body began to
swell. Then, all of a sudden, a kind of shudder convulsed it, and it
fell to the floor dead.

“That is what your blood did to that leech,” said the physician.

“I guess it wasn’t a healthy leech, any way.”

“Wasn’t healthy, eh? Well, we’ll try again.”

And the physician clapped two leeches on the young man’s thin arm.

“If they both die,” said the patient, “I’ll swear off--or at least,
I’ll cut down to ten a day.”

Even as he spoke, the smaller leech shriveled and dropped on his knee,
dead, and a moment later the larger one fell besides it.

“This is ghastly,” said the young man; “I’m worse than the pestilence
to these leeches.”

“It is the empyreumatic oil in your blood,” said the medical man. “All
cigarette fiends have it.”

“Doc,” said the young man, regarding the three dead leeches
thoughtfully, “I half believe you’re right.”--_Evanston (Illinois)
Index._




MADE A DRUNKARD BY HIS CIGAR


[Illustration]

I knew a young clergyman whose oratory obtained for him the admiration
of many influential persons, among whom was a gentleman of fortune, who
courted his company and taught him to smoke.

The young minister was warned of his danger, but could not be persuaded
to renounce that which he considered a harmless indulgence. He insisted
that his cigar soothed his mind and composed his feelings. A friend,
in reply, told him that the mind never needs composing when in health;
and the feelings never need artificial soothing only when improperly
irritated; and added, “Beware how you indulge in a bad habit.”

Impatient under the rebuke, the clergyman replied: “I smoke but seldom,
and could almost do without it.”

‘Seldom’ and ‘almost’ are two fatally ominous words. ‘Seldom’ will
become ‘regular,’ and ‘almost’ be converted into ‘always.’ And as
smoking and drinking are companions, let me beseech you, said his
friend, “not to make them yours. Ministers should be a fence around the
pit of perdition.

“Some inexperienced youth may see you smoke, and, imitating your
example, become a confirmed smoker, and sooner or later a confirmed
drunkard. The line of demarkation being once effaced, he may soon be
lost in the vortex of sin.”

Little did this young preacher suppose this to be a prophetic picture
of his own mournful case. But he continued the habit, and, little
by little, his splendid talents became dim, and his hearers forsook
him. His wealthy host, who first taught him to smoke, witnessed his
growing desire for stimulants, and with a look more expressive than
words, declared that “in spite of praying and preaching, professors
of religion like the good things of this life, as well as others; and
that, after all, saints and sinners are pretty much alike.”

The days of this eloquent young clergyman were ended in ignominy; and
a life which promised to be happy and illustrious, was early brought
to a miserable close. His intemperate habits, it was supposed, killed
his young wife, and made a beggar of his child. He died in a madhouse,
blaspheming the very Saviour whom he had once preached.

Avoid smoking. “It is the devil’s leading string, beginning with a hair
and ending with a cable.”

[Illustration: _DAVID PAULSON, M. D._

_President Anti-Cigarette League of America_]




SLAUGHTER OF THE INNOCENTS

BY DAVID PAULSON, M. D.


[Illustration]

In the Bellevue Hospital Medical College, when I was a student, I
performed an experiment that vividly impressed upon my mind the naked
fact that nicotin is a deadly poison. A large, healthy cat had become
such a nuisance that it was decided to kill it. This I proceeded to do
by the following method: I soaked enough tobacco in water to make an
ordinary cigarette. Then I injected under the cat’s skin a hypodermic
syringe full of this tobacco juice. In a few moments the cat began to
quiver, then to tremble more violently, then it had cramps, and in less
than twenty minutes it died in violent convulsions.

I take no pride in relating this experiment, for I know a shorter as
well as a more merciful method of ending a cat’s life.

But what interests me now is the truth that thousands of young men and
boys are waking up to the fact that tobacco in any form, and cigarettes
in particular, are unmitigated evils. And that for their own sakes,
they cannot afford to introduce into their bodies that which only
makes them weak, sickly, and useless.

I will tell you, briefly, how the burden of this terrible curse was
rolled upon my heart. God used a never-to-be-forgotten incident to burn
into my soul the tremendous importance of this cigarette evil.

One day, an old lady, with a faded red shawl thrown over her stooping
shoulders, came into my office, and asked if I could see her boy.
Two strong men then brought before me a poor boy of seventeen years,
wild-eyed and insane. The mother asked if he could be cured.

After investigating the case, I was compelled to tell her that the
outlook was hopeless, and that she might just as well send him to the
lunatic asylum. She broke down and sobbed as though her heart would
break. I asked her what had brought this terrible condition upon her
son, and she said:--

“Oh, it was cigarettes. He began to smoke more and more, until he used
fifty a day, and then his mind gave way.”

That day I became thoroughly enlisted in the anti-cigarette war. O that
our souls might become saturated with the importance of fighting this
awful evil! Cigarettes are making our boys weak and puny and unmanly.
They are sapping the strength from their muscles, and making them
unable to win their way in the world.

I care not how intelligent or brainy a boy may naturally be, a short
period of cigarette smoking will tell on him. He may not notice this
himself, at once, but others will. And I wish the young men and
boys to remember that if there is work to be done in the world which
requires much effort, either of brain or muscle, the cigarette smoker
is not chosen for the job. Why?--Because when the time comes to use the
brain or the muscles for some supreme effort, the poor, poison-soaked
muscles fail to respond, and the benumbed brain cannot do its best
work. I think if the boys only understood that cigarettes and tobacco
were ruining them physically and mentally, and preparing them for
certain defeat in life, they would shun both as they would the plague.


_The Cigarette Fiend is an Object of Pity_

When I talk on the cigarette evil in the Chicago public schools, I
ask how many of the children know of some poor crippled boy whose leg
was cut off by a street-car accident. Such a boy, if he has brains
and character, may yet fill a position of trust and usefulness in the
world, but the boy who begins to smoke cigarettes early enough, can
never be of any use in this world, and unless he repents, there will be
no place for him in the next. To try to put knowledge into his brain,
is as hopeless a task as to try to fill a basket with water.

The cigarette-smoking boy is looked upon by other people as an object
of pity. There is nothing truly brave or heroic about him. There may
have been naturally, but nature has been doped and stupefied and
abused, until there is nothing left in the poor lad that is manly
at all. If he wants to be a great hunter or a fine marksman or
sharpshooter, he must either give up this ambition, or else let the
cigarette alone forever. If he would like to be a famous doctor or
a skillful surgeon, he must not ruin his nerves, or he cannot trust
himself to hold a surgeon’s knife. No one would be willing to risk his
life in such hands.

[Illustration: _Listless Cigarette Smoker_]

[Illustration: _Pumping Water into Basket_]

Hang a half dozen brick around a boy’s neck, and ask him to swim a race
with you. Would that be fair? But the cigarette habit pulls one under
in life’s struggle, just the same.

What would the boys think if they saw a lad vigorously rubbing sand
into his eyes? They would think him crazy. Is it any more foolish to
rub sand into the eyes than it is to rub poison into the brain?

Suppose I should hand a boy my watch, and presently he begins to pour
tar into its works. Would you think he had much sense?

O it is cruel and unmanly to ruin and clog up and destroy these
wonderful bodies of ours. What an astonishing piece of machinery the
brain is! Almost everything depends upon having the head clear,--the
reasoning powers sharp and acute. But the deadly cigarette destroys the
keen sensibility of the nerve and brain cells, and renders the victim
unable to think clearly or logically.

Men who train great wrestlers and athletes to perform almost
unbelievable feats of physical endurance, know better than to allow
them to poison and paralyze these muscles of iron. Who ever heard of an
athlete smoking half a dozen cigarettes just before starting in to win
his medal as champion?

[Illustration: “_The cigarette kills the boy in the same way._”]


_Destroys on the Installment Plan_

Who has not watched the old family cat and noticed how she kills a
mouse,--a little at a time,--crushing her teeth into the poor thing’s
body, then letting it limp away a short distance, then springing upon
it and crushing it some more. Now the cigarette kills the boy in just
the same way, or, in other words, on the installment plan.

Any experienced physician can pick out a cigarette slave almost as far
as he can see him; for no one can smoke cigarettes a very long time,
before he begins to have the devil’s trade-mark stamped upon him.

We must never forget that we only pass over this road once,--we have
but one life here to live; and when we reach the end of the journey,
if the _Master_ cannot say to us, “Well done,” our life has been a
hopeless failure.


_A Simple but Sure Cure_

But suppose you have in mind some poor fellow who has become enslaved
by the unmanly habit. Of course you pity him in his helpless bondage.
Well, you may assure him that he may be saved by living exclusively on
a fruit diet for several days, eating all he wishes of it three or four
times a day, drinking plenty of water, and availing himself of a sweat
bath or two if convenient. I know from experience that God is on the
side of the fellow who is trying to do right,--that he may look to Him
for special help. Then the poor cigarette slave will be astonished to
see that it _is_ possible to slip out from under the yoke of habit.

Now in conclusion I want to say a few words to grown people who use
tobacco. I have seen a father teach his boy to pray, to ride a bicycle,
and to spell; but I never yet have seen a sensible, respectable man
teach his boy to smoke. This is the best argument I know against
tobacco using. If a man really believed tobacco was good for him, he
would want his wife, or his sister, or his mother, and his child to
share with him in this blessing.


_The Real Truth about Tobacco_

Tobacco does give a certain amount of unearned felicity, just as
alcohol or morphin does; but it charges a terrific toll in the way of
high blood pressure, injury to the nervous system and the digestive
organs, and more or less impairment of the whole man. Every man who is
a tobacco user sacrifices some of the best that is in him, spiritually,
mentally, and physically. The intolerable craving for the after-dinner
cigarette is often produced by the juicy beefsteak, highly spiced
food, or tea and coffee, that compose the meal. Hence, he who would
be delivered from the tobacco habit, should religiously avoid such
articles of food as create a demand and an unnatural craving for
tobacco.

But some will ask, “is it worse for a child to smoke a cigarette than
it is for a man to smoke a cigar?”--Yes, for three reasons:--

_First_, a man may safely tolerate a quarter of a grain of morphin,
while we dare not give a child more than a sixteenth part of a grain.
A young person’s nervous system is peculiarly susceptible to the
influence of such narcotic drugs as nicotin and morphin, and hence an
introduction to either of them early in life, spells almost certain
disaster, mental or nervous, later in life.

_Second_, the loosely packed cigarette does not permit the nicotin to
condense to the same extent as when it is drawn through pipe or cigar;
hence the smoker gets the full benefit (?) of this virulent poison.

_Third_, the oxidation of the cigarette paper produces deadly poison
which is only second in its effects to that of nicotin itself.

Well, then, to sum up: Is it any wonder that so many thousands of
our brightest, smartest, keenest young men and boys are signing the
Cigarette Pledge? They are keen enough to see that cigarettes and
tobacco used in any form, mean weak brains, flabby muscles, diseased
heart, and a useless and unhappy life.




THE MAJOR’S CIGAR


[Illustration]

After a separation of many years, I met my old friend, Major ----,
at a railway station. If he had not spoken first, I should not have
recognized my Virginia comrade of ’64. It was not merely the disguise
of a silken hat and a shaven cheek, but,--as I told him after we had
chatted awhile about each other’s ups and downs since the war,--I was
sure this was the first time I had ever seen him away from the table,
without a cigar in his mouth.

“Haven’t smoked for five years,” was his reply. “I’m down on tobacco as
thoroughly as you ever were.”

“Good. Tell me about it.”

We locked arms, and walked leisurely up and down the platform. Dropping
the dialogue, this was, in substance, his story:--

“It wasn’t a sudden conversion. I never was quite so easy in my mind
over it as I pretended to be. I intended to taper off when I got home
from the army. And I did,--smoked less in three weeks than I used to in
one.

“But one summer I went off on some business for our company, which kept
me up in the mountains, among the charcoal burners, three days longer
than I expected. I got out of cigars, and couldn’t obtain any at any
price.

“In forty-eight hours I was more uncomfortable and unstrung than I had
ever been in my life. I actually borrowed an old Irishman’s filthy clay
pipe, and tried to smoke it. I thought of that miserable summer we
spent, crawling about the trenches in Virginia, and, I am ashamed to
confess that I wished I was there again, with a cigar in my mouth.

“Then, I began to realize what a shameful bondage I was in to a
mere self-indulgence. I, a man who secretly prided himself on his
self-control, nerve, manliness,--who never flinched at hard fare or
rough weather,--a downright slave to a bad habit; unnerved and actually
unfit for business for lack of a cigar. It made me angry at myself; I
despised myself for my weakness.

“Going into the matter a little further, I found that the money I had
spent for cigars in a dozen years would have paid for my house and
furnished it. I had smoked away more money than I had laid out for
our library, our periodicals, and our intellectual culture generally.
Cigars had cost me nearly twice as much as I had given to church work,
missions, and charity.

“My conscience rose up at the record. I knew I could not plead any
equivalent for the outlay; it had not fed me; it had not strengthened
me; it had simply drugged me. Every cigar had made the next cigar a
little more necessary to my comfort. To use the mildest word, it had
been a _useless_ expenditure.

“My detention in the mountains was calculated to open my eyes to my
domestic short-comings, and I saw, as I never saw before, how selfishly
unsocial tobacco had made me at home. I smoked before I was married,
and my wife never entered any protest against my cigars afterward.

[Illustration: _An Unsocial Habit_]

[Illustration: _The Smoking Doctor_]

“But our first baby was a nervous child, and the doctor told me it
would not do for it to breathe tobacco smoke. So I got into the way of
shutting myself up in the library of evenings, and, after meals, to
enjoy my cigars. As I look at it now, nothing is more absurd than to
call smoking a _social habit_. It’s a poor pretense of sociability,
where a man is simply intent on his own enjoyment. My wife owns now
that my tobacco-tainted breath and tobacco-saturated clothing were
always more or less a trial to her.

“The satisfaction it has given me to be rid of a tobacco atmosphere,
and the thought of my contemptibly selfish indifference to her comfort
all those years, have humbled me, I tell you. And I wouldn’t exchange
my own daily satisfaction now-a-days in being a _cleaner_ man--inside
and outside,--for the delight that anybody gets out of his cigars.

“I didn’t need to go outside of my own door to find reasons enough for
giving up the habit; but I think I found still stronger ones, after
all, when I went away from home.

“The more I thought about the harm tobacco does in the community at
large, the more sure I felt that it was time for me to stop giving it
the moral support of my example. I know I smoked too much, and that my
nervous system is still the worse for it; and I think the people who
are likely to be hurt the most by it, are just the ones who are most
likely to smoke excessively.

“And then, I’ve noticed that the doctors who stand up for tobacco are
always men who use it, and are liable to the suspicion of straining a
point in justification of their own self-indulgence.

“On one point, though, I believe the authorities agree. No one denies
that it is a damaging indulgence for boys. It means a good deal when
smoking is forbidden to the pupils in the polytechnic schools of Paris,
and the military schools of Germany, purely on hygienic grounds. The
governments of these smoking nations are not likely to be notional in
that matter.

“But the use of tobacco by our American boys and men is excessive and
alarming. We ought to save our rising generation for better work than
they can do if tobacco saps the strength of their growing years, and
makes the descent easier, as it no doubt often does, to worse vices.
I don’t know how to forgive myself for the example I set before my
Sabbath-school class of bright boys, year after year, by my smoking
habits.

“It isn’t in the family, either, that the selfishness of the habit is
most apparent. I don’t believe, other things being equal, that there is
any other class of men who show such a disregard in public for other
people’s comfort as tobacco users do. A man would be considered a rowdy
or a boor who would willingly spatter mud on the clothing of a lady as
she passed him on the sidewalk. But a lady to whom tobacco fumes are
more offensive than mud, can hardly walk the streets in these days, but
that men who _call themselves gentlemen_,--and who are gentlemen in
most other respects,--blow their cigar smoke into her face at almost
every step.

“Smokers drive other men out of the gentlemen’s cabins on the
ferryboats, and from the gentlemen’s waiting rooms in railroad
stations, monopolizing these rooms as coolly as if they, only, had any
rights in them.

“I can’t explain such things except on the theory that tobacco beclouds
the moral sense, and makes men especially selfish.”

The Major’s train came in just then, and as he took my hand to say
“Good-by,” the smoking car of the waiting train drew his parting shot.

“See there! did you ever reflect how the tobacco habit levies its
taxes on everybody? The railway company furnishes an extra car for the
smokers, which, in the nature of the case, must be paid for by an extra
charge on the tickets of all the passengers. What a stir it would raise
if the legislature should attempt to furnish luxuries to any special
class at public cost in this way!

“How we’d vote them down! I vote against this thing by throwing away my
cigar.”




WHY HE DIDN’T SMOKE


[Illustration]

Johnnie Lord, the son of Mr. Jeremy Lord, aged fourteen, was spending
the afternoon with one of his young friends, and his stay was prolonged
into the evening, during which some gentlemen--friends of the
family--dropped in.

The boys withdrew into the recess of the bay-window, while the men
chatted sociably together.

The two boys kept their ears open, as boys will, and, taking their cue
from the sentiments expressed by their elders, endorsed one or the
other, as they happened to agree with them.

“Gentlemen, will you smoke?” asked Mr. Benedict, the host. A
simultaneous, “thank you,” went around, and a smile of satisfaction
lighted every face but one. He was not gloomy or a drawback on the
others, but his smile was not one of assent. A box of costly and
fragrant (?) cigars was soon forthcoming.

“Fine cigar,” said one, as he held it to his nose before lighting it.
“What, Linton, you don’t smoke?”

“I’m happy to say I do not,” was the firm rejoinder.

“Well, now, you look like a smoking man, jolly, care free, and all
that. I’m quite surprised,” said another.

“We are hardly doing right to smoke in the parlor, are we?” asked a
red-faced man, puffing away heartily. “I yield that much to my wife’s
dislike of the weed. She makes a great ado about the curtains, you
know.”

“For my part, that’s a matter I don’t trouble myself about,” said the
host, broadly. “There’s no room in this house too good for me and
my friends to smoke in. My wife has always understood that, and she
yields, of course.”

“But you don’t know how it chokes her,” said young Hal Benedict. “Yes,
indeed, it gets all through the house, you know, and she almost always
goes into Aunt Nellie’s, when there are two or three smoking. There she
goes, now,” he added, as the front door shut.

[Illustration: “_It’s driving her out of her house_”]

“Why, it’s absolutely driving her out of her house, isn’t it?”
whispered Johnnie Lord, from his nook. “Too bad!”

“Why don’t you smoke, Linton?” queried one of the party. “’Fraid of it?
Given it up lately? Of course it doesn’t agree with some constitutions.”

“Well, if you want to know why I don’t smoke, friend Jay,” was the
answer, “I will tell you; I respect my wife too much.”

“Why, you don’t mean--” stammered his questioner.

“I mean simply what I said. When I was married, I had the habit of
smoking cigars. But I saw that the smoke annoyed her, though she
behaved with the utmost good taste and forbearance. Seeing this, I cut
down my cigars so as to smoke only when going to and returning from
business.

“But even then, I considered what my presence must be to a delicate,
sensitive woman, with my breath and clothes saturated with the odor,
and I began to be disgusted with myself, so that I finally dropped the
habit, and I can’t say I’m sorry.”

“I shouldn’t be, I know,” said another, admiringly. “I’m candid enough
to own it, and I think your wife ought to be very much obliged to you.”

“On the contrary, it is I who ought to be obliged to my wife,” said Mr.
Linton, while the host smoked on in silence, very red in the face, and
evidently wincing under the reproof that was not meant.

“I say, Linton is a perfect gentleman,” whispered young Benedict.

“He’s splendid,” supplemented Johnnie Lord, who was thinking his own
thoughts; but the smoke was really getting too much for him, and
presently he took his leave.

The next day Johnnie Lord was thoughtful; so quiet, indeed, that
everybody noticed it. In the evening, when his father lighted his pipe,
with its strong tobacco, Johnnie seemed to be on thorns.

“I can’t think that you don’t respect mother,” he blurted out, and then
his face grew scarlet.

“What do you mean?” asked his father in a severe voice. “I say, what do
you mean, sir?”

“Because mother hates the smoke so; because it gets into the curtains
and carpet--and--and--because I heard Mr. Linton say last night, that
he did not smoke because he respected his wife too much.”

“Pshaw! Your mother doesn’t mind my smoking--do you mother?” he asked,
jocularly, as his wife entered the room.

“Well--I--I used to, rather more than I do now. One can get accustomed
to anything, I suppose, so I go on the principle that what can’t be
cured must be endured.”

“Nonsense! you know I could stop to-morrow if I wanted to,” he laughed.

“But you won’t want to,” she said, softly.

Now I don’t know whether Johnnie’s father gave up the weed. Most likely
not; but if you want to see what really came of it, I will give you a
peep at the following paper, written some years ago, and which happens
to be in my possession.

  “_I John Lord, of sound mind, do make, this first day of January, the
  following resolutions, which I pray God I may keep_:--

  “_FIRST: I will not get married until I own a house._

  “_SECOND: I will never swear, because it is silly, as well as wicked._

  “_THIRD: I will never smoke, and so make myself disagreeable to
  everybody who comes near me, and I will always keep these words as my
  motto after I am married_:--

  “_‘I don’t smoke because I respect my wife.’ Mr. Linton said that,
  and I will never forget it._”

And Johnnie kept his word like a hero.




EXPERIENCES OF JOHN B. GOUGH


[Illustration]

When in Worcester, England, twenty-six years ago, I was the guest of a
gentleman, a member of Parliament, who resided just opposite the city,
on the bank of the river,--a delightful place.

I was at that time a smoker, and although I had never smoked in a
gentleman’s house without an invitation, I deemed it necessary to have
my smoke after dinner, if I could get it without annoying others.

So, after dinner, I strolled down to the riverside, out of sight of the
house, took out my cigars and matches and proceeded to light a cigar.
The wind blew out the match. Another was tried, and another. I took
off my hat to shield it from the wind. It was of no avail. I got some
brimstone down my throat, or something as bad; but the cigar would not
ignite.

Then I kneeled down close to the rock by the path, at the side of the
river, and with my hat off, endeavored to secure the object. Now, I
never go on my knees but I am reminded of prayer, and the thought
came:--

“If anyone should see me, he would probably think that some man had
sought that retired spot for devotion, and that he was saying his
prayers; and what am _I_ doing?--I am sucking away at a cigar, hoping
to obtain fire enough from the match to get a smoke. What would the
audience say, who heard me last night, if they should see me?”

The inconsistency of my practise with my profession struck me so
forcibly that I said, “_I’ll have no more of it._”

I rose from my knees, took the cigars and the matches from my pockets,
and threw them into the river, and I never touched a cigar to smoke for
eighteen years.

       *       *       *       *       *

The reformed drunkard, John B. Gough, who became the great evangelist
of temperance, kept his freedom from drink at the cost of occasional
terrible torture. To its awful intensity, an old friend, with whom
he made his home whenever he visited Chicago, bears witness. The
story contains not only a vivid warning against drink, but a hopeful
illustration of the victories that, with God’s help, may be won.

“One day I found Mrs. Gough sitting by the window, holding her
newspaper upside down. Mr. Gough was lying on the lounge on the other
side of the room, with his face to the wall.

“‘What is the matter?’ I asked in alarm.

“‘What makes you think anything is the matter?’ Mrs. Gough asked.

“With a gesture, I indicated the newspaper.

“‘Oh, there _is_ matter!’ she cried. ‘Go to John!’

“I sat down by him, and began to talk to him in a low voice, while I
smoothed his hair, as he loved to have me do because it soothed him. I
reminded him of the good he was doing, of the thousands he had redeemed
from drink, and of the families that he had made happy.

“All at once he turned over and looked at me. I hardly knew him! His
eyes were sunken, his skin was ghastly gray. Then he said with the deep
voice that so thrilled his audiences:--

“‘Do you believe I love that woman over there by the window?’

“‘I have never doubted it,’ I replied.

“‘Do you believe I love you?’ he asked.

“‘It is one of the chief joys of my life to know that you do,’ I said,
with a lump in my throat.

“‘Then if you want to know how I feel,’ he cried, ‘It is this way: as
if I’d be willing to see you both in hell, if it would only be right
for me to take just one drink!’

“To such an extremity as this can the morbid craving for drink reduce
even a good man. The temptation came upon him now and then with awful
force. It was heart-breaking to see him. At such times he never dared
to be left alone. Once when he was thus attacked by temptation at a
hotel away from his friends, he locked the door of his room and threw
the key out over the transom.

“‘Once the devil gets a clutch on you, he never lets go,’ he said. ‘God
save our young people from thinking that the habit is only a little
thing!’”




TALMAGE ON TOBACCO


[Illustration]

At a Friday evening lecture in New York City, Dr. Talmage spoke on the
evil habit of tobacco using, as follows:--

“There are a multitude of young men smoking themselves to death.
Nervous, cadaverous, narrow-chested, and fidgety, they are preparing
for early departure, or a half-and-half existence that will be of
little satisfaction to themselves, or of little use to others. Quit it,
my young brother. Before you get through this life, you will want stout
nerves and a broad chest and a brain unclouded with tobacco smoke.

“To get rid of the habit will require a struggle, as I know by bitter
experience. Cigars and midnight study nearly put an end to my existence
at twenty-five years of age. I got so I could do no kind of study
without a cigar in my mouth--as complete a slave as some of you are.

“At one time I was about to change pastorates from one city to another,
when a wholesale cigar dealer offered as an inducement to my going to
Philadelphia, that he would give me all my cigars, free of charge, all
the rest of my life. He was a splendid man, and I knew he would keep
his promise.

“Then I reasoned thus: If now, when my salary is small, and cigars are
high, I smoke up to my full endurance, what would become of my health
if I got all of my cigars for nothing? Well, I have never touched the
infernal weed since. From that time I was revolutionized in health and
mind,--emancipated by the grace of God.

“I implore young men to strike out for the liberation of their entire
nature from all kinds of evil habits. Even on our railroads they have
introduced a pig-pen on wheels,--the smoking-car--and it is being made
easier and easier all of the time to sacrifice physical strength and
health.

“All those who break down their health through indulgence, and go into
the grave sooner than they would otherwise have done, are suicides, and
the day of judgment will so reveal it.”

       *       *       *       *       *

A prominent church man once said: “I used to use tobacco. When I gave
it up I had a hard time for ten weeks. I was unable to sleep at night,
would walk the floor, but God gave me the victory.”

Dr. Cole, a prominent Methodist physician, said: “I used to use the
weed, but I reached the time when I wanted to lead a better spiritual
life, and I felt that tobacco stood between my Maker and my soul.”




TOBACCO AND THE CIGARETTE

PART ONE--WHAT IS TOBACCO?

  “_Tobacco is the worst curse of modern civilization._”--_John Ruskin._


While the pages of this book are devoted largely to the drink evil, we
must not forget the monster evil of Tobacco, nor of the small, innocent
appearing Cigarette. For although small singly, in the aggregate it
is appalling. From year to year the consumption of Cigarettes has so
rapidly increased, that in 1911 there were 11,250,000,000 consumed in
the United States alone. Of the track of ruin left by this “little
monster,” the following pages will testify.

So close a second does the evils of Tobacco run to that of drink, that
it is claimed by many that Tobacco is a greater curse than Rum. But one
fact is sure: Tobacco in all its forms, more than all other influences,
creates a thirst for alcoholic drinks, and is the greatest friend of
the saloon.

The data from which this department has been compiled, was supplied by
a lecturer on the Cigarette evil of more than four years’ experience.
His facilities for obtaining accurate information, and important
statements from reliable sources, have been unsurpassed.

We commend the facts presented in this department to the careful
consideration of every one into whose hands this book may fall.

       *       *       *       *       *

What is Tobacco? It is a poison so deadly that it cannot be brought
under the Pure Food and Drug Act. It is not rated as a drug, but as a
poison too dangerous to use in ordinary medical practice. It can be
brought under the Drug Act only by special action of Congress. Please
note what medical men say of it:--

  “Tobacco is the _most subtle_ poison known to the chemist, except the
  deadly prussic acid.”--_M. Orfila, President of the Medical Academy,
  Paris._

  “It is believed by all judicious practitioners _too dangerous_
  to be employed as a medicine. The benefits as a remedy do not
  counter-balance the risk of using it. Yet so insidious are its
  effects that few have regarded it as swelling the bills of mortality.
  It is, nevertheless, true that _multitudes_ are carried to the
  _grave_ every year by _tobacco alone_.”--_Dr. Grimshaw._

  “Surgeons have sometimes resorted to a weak infusion of tobacco
  injected into the bowels in cases in which it was necessary to induce
  immediate prostration of energy, as in cases of strangulated hernia
  and in bad dislocations of the joints; but even in these cases, the
  _risk_ is so _great_ that no prudent surgeon will use it except as a
  _last resort_.”--_Dr. Harris._

  “The profession have no idea of the _ignorance_ of the public
  regarding the nature of tobacco. Even intelligent, well-educated men
  _stare in astonishment_ when you tell them it is one of the most
  powerful poisons. _Now is this right?_ Has the medical profession
  _done its duty_? Ought we not _as a body_ to have told the _public_
  that of _all_ our poisons, it is the _most insidious_, _uncertain_,
  and, in full doses, the _most deadly_?”--_Dr. Solly, Insurance
  Medical Examiner._

  “One-fourth of a drop of nicotin will _kill a frog_ in ten seconds;
  one-sixth of a drop will _kill a cat_ in fourteen seconds.”

  “The poison is slow; but in the second and third decade its virus
  becomes manifest. The words of the wise man, “Because sentence
  against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart
  of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil,” is strikingly
  applicable to those who indulge in this pernicious habit. There have
  died in New York, within a few years, three excellent clergymen, all
  of whom might now have been alive, had they not used tobacco. The
  duty of abstaining from the _slow killing_ of one’s self by this
  poison is as clear as the duty of not _cutting one’s throat_.”--_Dr.
  Willard Parker._

  “Tobacco is not an innocent substance. It contains nicotin, an
  alkaloid which is a poison, _destroying life_ very quickly, even when
  taken in small doses. It acts as speedily as hydrocyanic [prussic]
  acid. Thirty grains of tobacco, or one or two drops of nicotin, would
  most likely be a fatal dose. Death by tobacco may occur in less than
  half an hour; by the alkaloid [nicotin] in a _few minutes_.”--_Norman
  Kerr, M. D._

  “So very _dangerous_ and potent are its _narcotic_ properties, that
  tobacco is only seldom used for any purpose in medicine; and when it
  is resorted to, the greatest _caution_ is necessary.”--_Dr. Elisha
  Harris._

  “_The profession have no idea of the ignorance of the public
  regarding the nature of Tobacco. Even intelligent, well-educated
  men stare in astonishment when you tell them it is one of the most
  powerful poisons. Now is this right? Has the medical profession done
  its duty? Ought we not as a body to have told the public that of all
  our poisons, it is the most insidious, uncertain, and, in full doses,
  the most deadly?_”--_Dr. Solly, Insurance Medical Examiner._




TOBACCO AND THE CIGARETTE

PART TWO--ECONOMIC


Why do farmers raise Tobacco, manufacturers make it up, and dealers
sell it?--It is because there is an enormous profit in it all along
the lines. The profit is so great that the manufacturers sometimes pay
$1500.00 to $2000.00 for a single advertisement in a leading journal.

In an editorial entitled “The Damnable Cigarette,” in the _Religious
Weekly_, of May 6, 1911, we read of the profits of the Tobacco Trust as
follows:--

  “The evil is fearfully profitable.--the net income over
  $25,000,000--an increase of about twenty per cent. The dividends on
  common stock increased from fifty per cent to sixty-two and one-half
  per cent. The fat pockets of the recipients jingled with the gruesome
  coin, while insane lads and weeping mothers sat in sodden shame and
  sorrow.”


_What Statistics Show_

  “The consumers of chewing and smoking tobacco, in 1908, paid as a tax
  into the United States Treasury at the rate of $54,984 per day. _They
  more than paid the sailors of the United States Navy._”

  “The smokers of _cigars_ and _Cigarettes_ pay an average of
  _sixty-six thousand six hundred thirty-seven dollars per day_ in tax,
  or enough to provide salaries for the Supreme Court of the United
  States for one whole year. And the good ‘Sisters of the Chimney
  Corner’ paid _tax on snuff_ at the rate of _three thousand four
  hundred seventy-three dollars a day_. They thus contribute enough
  money to Uncle Sam’s exchequer, to maintain the Public Health and
  Marine hospital service.”

  “Should three of our largest American cities burn down each year,
  it would be considered a national calamity; and yet, each year, the
  people of this country burn up in tobacco leaves, an amount equal to
  the total assessed valuation of Detroit, Cincinnati, and Buffalo.
  But the financial waste is of small consideration compared with the
  physical and moral waste resulting therefrom.”

  “_A brand new Panama Canal_ could be built each year for the money
  that is reduced to ashes between the lips of America’s cigar smokers.
  And the census report shows that the consumption of cigars since 1860
  has increased _twenty-fold_, while the population has increased only
  _twofold_. Every year our cigar bill increases another thirty million
  dollars.”

  “An industry that shows such stupendous figures of present volume and
  of steady growth, indicates unusual stability.”

Dr. D. H. Kress, speaking from his extended experience as physician and
superintendent of sanitariums in England, in Australia, and in America,
where he has had unusual opportunities for observing the effect of
tobacco upon the human body, in an article entitled, “The Rapid
Increase of the Tobacco Habit,” says:--

  “The amount spent in the United States alone for tobacco, annually,
  would enable me to provide thirty thousand families each year with
  all the necessities of life. In addition, I could grant an allowance
  of $5,000 to each of ten thousand other families. To each of ten
  thousand others I could give $10,000. To each of one thousand other
  heads of families, I could make a Christmas present of $50,000. To
  each of another thousand I could give $100,000; and, besides, to each
  of five hundred of my best friends I could make an annual allowance
  of $1,000,000. After doing all this, I would still have left each
  year, $200,000,000 to bestow on charitable institutions, and at least
  $10,000,000 to keep the wolf from the door. Four hundred years ago
  the use of tobacco was unknown in civilized lands. To-day it is used
  by men, women, and children. Degeneracy has been the result. What
  the coming generations will be, if this craze continues to increase
  as it has in the past, does not present a picture pleasing to
  contemplate.”--_Temperance Instructor for 1911._

  In 1910, while traveling in Northern Michigan, I met Mr. A----, a
  business man of Grand Rapids. He said he had never used Tobacco. He
  had two boys who had never used the weed. He owns a nice home, his
  boys are strong and healthy; the older one is a prominent athlete at
  the Y. M. C. A. Mr. A---- said he was one day calling on a neighbor
  who asked why Mr. A---- was able to own a home, while he could not.

  While they were talking, the elder son of Mr. G---- came in and said,
  “Give me a cigar, dad.” The father replied, “They are all gone. Go to
  the store and buy a box.” When the son returned, father and son each
  took a cigar. In a short time the younger son, a boy of sixteen or
  seventeen, came and asked for a cigar and was told, “There’s the box,
  help yourself!”

  They could not afford a home, but could afford to buy cigars by
  the box. In the twenty years of married life of that man, _he had
  burned up a home_, was setting a bad example for his boys, and
  allowing them to use a poison that was injuring them. Mr. G---- and
  his two sons were not up to the standard of Mr. A---- and his sons,
  physically, mentally, financially. Why?--Tobacco. A word to the wise
  is sufficient. A noted man once said, “_Let your competitor smoke_.”




TOBACCO AND THE CIGARETTE

PART THREE--PHYSICAL EFFECT


Tobacco in any form is a deadly poison, deteriorating the bodily
forces, deading to the finer sensibilities, and destructive to the
finer mental and moral preceptions. But above every other evil, the
effects of the Cigarette upon children and youth is the most deadly.


_Testimony of Athletes and Athletic Directors_

[Illustration: =The star batter of the Philadelphia Athletics, “Home
Run Baker,” says: “I don’t drink nor smoke. Never did drink nor smoke.
If any youngster wants advice from one who doesn’t mean to preach,
there it is. Leave cigarettes and tobacco in any form alone, and
don’t touch ‘booze’ now or at any time. It’s the usual advice and
doesn’t carry much weight as a rule, but coming from a ball-player
perhaps it may mean a little more to the American boy. Mine is the
total-abstinence platform for both liquor and tobacco.”=]

  “The Cigarette is more harmful than whisky.”--_Joseph H. Thompson,
  Coach of the Foot-Ball and Track Team of the University of Pittsburg._

  “I believe that the Cigarette is the one thing that is keeping
  many young men from developing the best that is in them, not only
  physically, but mentally and morally.”--_E. E. Bliss, Physical
  Director, Oakland, Calif., Y. M. C. A._

  “A man’s training is given to increase his endurance; so he must
  leave tobacco alone; for all trainers know that the use of it will
  effect the use of the heart’s action.”--_C. H. Price, Y. M. C. A.
  Physical Director, Los Angeles, Calif._

  “Whenever it is desired to secure the highest possible working
  ability by the organism, as in athletic contests, where the maximum
  of effort is demanded, all motor-depressant influences are removed
  as far as possible, _tobacco_ being _one of the first substances
  forbidden_.”--_Jay W. Seaver, A. M., M. D., Medical Examiner of the
  Yale University Gymnasium._


_Tobacco Dwarfs_

The average American boy wants to become an athlete. He should know
that _tobacco will stunt the growth_,--a fact that is proved by medical
men and educators who have given careful attention to the subject. Here
are a few statements on this point:--

  “There is nothing that so stunts the growth of boys and young men, of
  the present day, as the use of tobacco.”--_Physical Director, Denver
  Y. M. C. A._

  “Personally, I have examined over fourteen thousand young men, and
  from general observation I can say that smoking has had its effect
  most particularly on the nervous system of the growing lad, as well
  as hindering his physical development.”--_A. G. Studer, Acting
  General Secretary, Detroit Y. M. C. A._

  “We have carried on a series of observations relative to smokers.
  We find that smoking is _injurious_ to _growing boys_ and youth;
  that the smoker does not attain and hold as high a stand in the
  university as the non-smoker does. His _physical development_ is _not
  so good_, and his _lung capacity_ is usually lower than that of the
  non-smoker. I have no hesitation in saying that I consider the use of
  nicotin harmful for a growing youth.”--_W. G. Anderson, M. A., M. D.,
  Director of Yale University Gymnasium._

  “Unquestionably the most important matter in the health history of
  the students at this academy is that relating to the use of tobacco.
  I have urged upon the superintendent, as my last official utterance,
  the fact of the truth of which five years’ experience as a health
  officer of the station has satisfied me, that beyond all other
  things, the future health and usefulness of the lads educated at this
  school, require the absolute interdiction of tobacco. In this opinion
  I have been sustained not only by all of my colleagues, but by all
  other sanitarians in civil and military life whose views I have been
  able to learn.”--_Report of Dr. Albert L. Gihon, Senior Medical
  Officer of the Naval Academy at Annapolis, Md._

  “Tobacco is ruinous in our schools and colleges, dwarfing _body and
  mind_.”--_Dr. Willard Parker._

  “I shall not hesitate to pronounce tobacco in young men to be
  evil, and only evil, physically, mentally, and morally.”--_Edward
  Hitchcock, of Amherst College._

  “In recent years there has been a decided increase in the number
  of sudden deaths from heart failure. There is no doubt that this
  increase is partially due to the free use of tobacco. _Nicotin
  strikes a direct blow at the heart._ It _weakens the heart’s action_,
  and in time brings about degenerative changes in its structure
  and also in the walls of the blood vessels. The hypertension and
  arteriosclerosis indicative of degenerative changes, are usually
  found among users of tobacco.”--_Dr. Kress._




TOBACCO AND THE CIGARETTE

PART FOUR--MORAL AND MENTAL EFFECTS

    If _one sin_ breaks through the door,
    It will soon _make room_ for more;
    Shut the door against the first,
    Then you’ll never meet the worst.

    _C. M. Willis, Page 96, Temperance Torchlights._


  “Out of six hundred in the State prison at Auburn, N. Y., sent there
  for crimes committed through strong drink, five hundred testified
  that it was _tobacco_ that led them to _intemperance_.”--_Meta
  Lander._

  “Smoking and chewing tobacco, by rendering water and other simple
  liquids insipid to the taste, dispose very much to the use of ardent
  spirits. Hence the practice of smoking cigars has been followed by
  the use of brandy and water as a common drink.”--_Dr. Benj. Rush,
  Formerly Professor of Chemistry and Theory and Practice of Medicine
  in Philadelphia Medical College._

  “The use of tobacco among the young is productive of mental and
  moral deterioration, while in the older persons, the use of the weed
  produces brain diseases and insanity. I have had a large experience
  in brain diseases, and am satisfied that smoking is the most noxious
  habit. I know of _no other cause or agent_ that so much tends to
  bring on functional diseases, and through this, in the end, leads
  to _organic diseases of the brain_.”--_Dr. Solly, of St. Thomas
  Hospital, of England._

  “In all my twenty-five years’ experience as a teacher, I have never
  known an exception to the rule, that a boy in taking on the tobacco
  habit in any form, immediately begins to deteriorate mentally. If
  he takes Cigarettes he will degenerate morally very rapidly, and
  physically, too. I am firmly convinced that tobacco in any form
  degenerates morally as it relates to growing boys.”--_H. H. Cully,
  Principal Glenville High School, Cleveland, Ohio._

  “It is more difficult to restore an inebriate who persists in the
  use of tobacco. In some cases when tobacco is given up, all desire
  for spirits disappear.”--_T. D. Crothers, M. D., Editor Journal of
  Inebriety._

  “So _inseparable_ are the habits of drinking and smoking, that
  in some places the same word expresses both. Thus, the word
  ‘peend,’ in the Bengalia language, signifies ‘to drink’ and ‘to
  smoke.’”--_Clarke._

  “The inebriate who uses tobacco, has always a weaker nervous system
  than one who does not. Tobacco undoubtedly predisposes to, and
  encourages the use of, alcohol. In all cases it has an appreciable
  injurious effect upon the nerve-centers.”--_T. D. Crothers, M. D.,
  Editor Journal of Inebriety._


_A Nuisance,--The Smoker_

    “Signs may threaten, men may warn him,
        Babies cry, and women coax,
    But he cares not one iota;
        For he calmly smokes and smokes.”

[Illustration]




TOBACCO AND THE CIGARETTE

PART FIVE--SPIRITUAL EFFECTS

“_I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable service._”

“_If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the
temple of God is holy, which temple ye are._”--_Paul._

       *       *       *       *       *

  Yet professed Christians, and even ministers of the gospel, will
  saturate themselves with the filthy weed tobacco in some of its
  forms, filling their blood with the nicotin poison until a leech
  placed upon the arm will fall dead inside of sixty seconds.

  No one can so debase and deaden his physical system without impairing
  his mental powers. When the mental powers are thus degraded, and the
  faculties so impaired, just to that extent is the power to give God
  “reasonable service” destroyed.

  Of course it is to professed Christian tobacco users that this
  chapter is presented. And to them we will say that their evil example
  is the argument behind which boy and men tobacco users hide, and
  by which they defend their use of the weed. Tens of thousands of
  boys are going to ruin physically, mentally, and morally because of
  the evil example of professed Christians, prominent educators, and
  physicians.


_A Clean Ministry_

“_Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord._”--_Isaiah._

A prominent church man once related the following experience:--

  “I used to use tobacco. When I gave it up I had a hard time for ten
  weeks. I was unable to sleep at night, would walk the floor, but God
  gave me victory.”

Josiah Strong, in his “Challenge for the Churches” (page 267), does
some interesting figuring. He says:--

  “There are 20,000,000 Protestant church members in the United States.
  About one-third of them are males. Assuming that only one-half of the
  male membership are smokers (and we are afraid it is a very generous
  supposition), there are 3,333,000 in that class. On the supposition
  that each smoke only three five-cent cigars a day, they together
  spend $500,000 daily for tobacco.”


_How the Deacon Took the Tobacco Cure_

  An evangelist conducting a revival service in Marietta, Ohio, relates
  the following incident:--

One of the deacons of the church, a very earnest man, was addicted to
the use of tobacco. He was teacher of a large class of young ladies,
and was very anxious that they should all be brought to Christ before
the meeting closed. At the beginning of the series of services he
brought me a list of the unconverted ones, and requested that I should
pray and work for their conversion. We had a short talk concerning his
class, and he seemed worried about his influence with them. As the week
wore on and none of them were converted, he became more and more uneasy.

On Sunday morning he came to me with tears in his eyes and said he was
going to make _a confession_ to the class. I asked him what it was, and
he replied: “I have been a slave to tobacco. I can not stand before
these girls and plead with them to accept Christ with the taste of that
vile stuff in my mouth. I promised God I would stop it last night.
This morning when the appetite for it came on, the _devil_ told me I
couldn’t. I am going to tell the girls about it this morning and ask
them to pray for me.”

When the Sunday-school hour was about half over I looked into his
class room. All the heads were bowed in prayer, and most of the girls
had their handkerchiefs to their faces, and were crying. As I closed
the door softly I heard one of them praying, “Dear Jesus, _cure_ our
teacher.”

You wouldn’t have known that class of girls when they came out of the
class room that day. Their indifference seemed to be all gone. The
deacon followed them into the auditorium, and there he met his partner
in the grocery store.

“John,” he said, his face all aglow, “_I’ve taken the tobacco cure_.”

“What is it?” asked his partner.

“I won’t tell you now, John; but if it cures me will you take it too?”

“Sure,” replied the partner.

“Shake hands on it,” said the deacon.

They clasped hands, and in a few weeks afterward the deacon kept him to
his word.

The deacon’s tobacco cure was the inspiration of the meeting. Inside of
three weeks _every girl in that class had accepted Christ_, and they
didn’t stop at that, either. Many others were brought to Christ through
their efforts. And so the deacon’s tobacco cure became “the cure of
souls.”--_Stephen J. Corey, in the Christian Endeavor World._


_An Appeal to Christians._

But what can be done to teach children and youth the evils of a
practice of which _parents_, _teachers_, and _ministers_ set them the
_example_? Little boys hardly emerged from babyhood may be seen smoking
their Cigarettes. If one speaks to them about it they say, “My father
uses tobacco.” They _point to the minister_ or the _Sunday-school
superintendent_, and say, “Such a man smokes; what harm for me to do
as he does?” _Many workers in the temperance cause use tobacco._ What
power can such persons have to stay the progress of intemperance?

I appeal to those who profess to believe and obey the Word of God:
Can you as a Christian indulge in a habit that is paralyzing your
intellect, and robbing you of power rightly to estimate eternal
realities? Can you consent daily to _rob God of service_ which is his
due, and _to rob your fellow men_, both of service you might render,
and of the power of example?

Have you considered your responsibilities as God’s stewards for the
means in your hands? How much of the Lord’s money do you spend for
tobacco? Reckon up what you have thus spent during your lifetime. How
does the amount consumed by this defiling lust compare with what you
have given for the relief of the poor and the spread of the gospel?

No human being needs tobacco, but _multitudes_ are _perishing_ for
want of the means that by its use is worse than wasted.--_Ministry of
Healing._




TOBACCO AND THE CIGARETTE

PART SIX--THE CIGARETTE


  The question is often asked, “Why is the Cigarette doing more harm
  than the other forms of Tobacco?” We answer:--

_First_, because the user of the Cigarette is _more apt to inhale_ than
the user of pipe or cigars.

  “When tobacco smoke is inhaled [breathed into the lungs], the nicotin
  enters the cerebral circulation directly and benumbs the brain. It
  enters the larynx and bronchial tubes, coating their membrane with
  carbon and acting as an irritant.”

_Second_, because the combination of the tobacco and the paper in the
Cigarette form several poisons that are injurious. They are:--

  _Prussic Acid_: the most deadly poison known.

  _Acrolein_: rated in any standard book of chemistry as second only
  to prussic acid in its deadly effect. In Webster’s International
  Dictionary, 1901, it is defined as “A limpid, colorless, highly
  volatile liquid. Its vapors are intensely irritating.”

  _Pyridine_: “It is the nucleus of a large number of organic
  substances, among which several alkaloids, as nicotin, ... may be
  mentioned.”

  _Carbonic Oxide or Monoxide gas_: “Carbonic oxide (chem.): a
  colorless gas. C. O. of slight odor, called more correctly _Carbon
  Monoxide_. It is the product of the incomplete combustion of
  carbon.... It is fatal to animal life.”

  Besides these poisons, nicotin is always present in tobacco in any
  form,--giving a total of _five poisons in the Cigarette_.

_Third, Ignorance of the effects_ of Cigarettes on the human being. The
Cigarette being so small, and the white paper so clean in appearance,
thousands of innocent people are entrapped and ruined physically,
mentally, and morally, by those “_Little White Devils_.” It has been
estimated that from _one thousand two hundred to one thousand five
hundred boys begin smoking every day_.


_Women and Baby Smokers_

In 1909, I was invited to speak at a woman’s missionary meeting, at
Washington, D. C. At the close of the meeting an elderly lady asked for
literature giving statements as to the effect of Cigarettes. She said
she had a married daughter that was smoking Cigarettes, and _teaching
her little three-year-old boy to smoke_!

I knew a woman who began smoking Cigarettes. I was shocked when I
heard that she had placed a Cigarette in the mouth of her sweet little
four-year-old girl. I tell you that made me mad! I said then that I
would do all I could to knock out Cigarettes. A young married lady
told me that her husband was a “Cigarette fiend.” He was dopy most of
the time. When not under the influence of Cigarettes, he was restless,
nervous, irritable, and unkind. Life to her became a burden.

“A Cigarette dealer in Philadelphia states that he sells one hundred
fifty thousand Cigarettes a month to women who come in carriages, and
send footmen to buy.”


_A World Wide Evil_

Dr. Clinton says that “a good deal has been said about the evils of
Cigarette smoking; but not one half the truth has ever been told.”

_Not only in America_, but in every land, in every clime, is the effect
of the Cigarette seen. In _China_, where such a successful crusade
against opium was made, the tobacco people from our own civilized
America went with an unlimited amount of advertising matter, and sample
packages of Cigarettes, which were scattered broadcast, and now the
Cigarette habit threatens to be a _greater curse than opium was_!


_Effects Upon School Boys_

A physician’s statement:--

  “_Cigarette smoking first blunts the whole_ moral nature. It has
  an appalling effect upon the physical system as well. It _first
  stimulates_, then _stupefies the nerves_. _It sends boys into
  consumption._ It gives _them enlargement of the heart_ and it _sends
  them to the insane asylum_!

  “I am often called in to prescribe for boys for palpitation
  of the heart. In nine cases out of ten this is caused by the
  Cigarette habit. I have seen _bright boys turned into dunces_, and
  _straightforward, honest boys made miserable cowards_ by Cigarette
  smoking. I am speaking the truth,--nearly every physician and every
  teacher knows.”--_Dr. A. Clinton._

In a school of 500 pupils, a careful investigation extending over
several months was made, and briefly summed up, shows the following:--

  “The average efficiency of the _non-smokers_ in that school was
  ninety-five per cent, in other words, ninety-five out of every one
  hundred were reasonably sure of getting at least a good common school
  education, while of the _Cigarette fiends_, only five to ten per
  cent stand any show in school, and they are _two and one-fifth years
  behind in their own grade_, and more than _three years behind the
  girls they started with in the first grade_.

  “The teachers who made this investigation expressed themselves to the
  parents of the boys as follows:--

  “We desire to call attention to the fact that a _large majority_ of
  the boys of this city are smoking Cigarettes; that the boys who are
  smoking are, on an average, years behind the boys who do not smoke;
  and still farther behind the girls in the same grades; that the
  _mental_, _moral_, and _physical condition_ of many of these boys is
  _extremely deplorable_, and will certainly continue to grow worse
  unless the habit is stopped; that while the schools are insisting
  that this and other unclean and undesirable habits shall not be
  practiced in or about the school house or grounds; still, crowds of
  our boys are daily seen around the saloons and loafing places of
  our streets, smoking, _loafing_, _swearing_, and _cultivating other
  undesirable habits_.

  “This was _plain talk_, and it had _immediate_ effect. It is
  estimated that seventy-five per cent of the Cigarette smoking by boys
  was stopped. What was called the worst school in the country, is now
  spoken of as doing good work. _The school board raised the salary
  of the teachers and principal_ twenty-five per cent. The people are
  pleased. The improved condition of the boys is noticeable in their
  _language_, _dress_, _manners_, _efficiency_, and especially in their
  _moral tone_.

  “_The former principal and superintendent smoked._”

But think! that is but one school among thousands in America that is
wasting money in trying to _educate numbskulls_! Bob Burdette, in his
comical way, says:--

  “_My son, as long as thou hast in thy skull the sense of a jay bird,
  break away from the Cigarette, for lo, it causeth thy breath to stink
  like a glue factory; it rendereth thy mind less intelligent than that
  of a cigar store dummy, yea, thou art a cipher with the rim knocked
  off._”

  When you rub the rim off a cipher you have less than nothing.

Theodore Roosevelt expresses himself as follows:--

  “If you are going to do anything permanent for the average man, you
  have got to begin before he is a man. The chance of success lies in
  working with the boy, and not with the man.”--_Theodore Roosevelt._


_Bad Example of Educators and School Men_

Superintendent J. K. McBroom, in an address to educators, said in
part:--

  “What will we do with a superintendent who uses tobacco? Send him to
  the legislature? Legislative atmosphere seems to be _mostly tobacco
  smoke anyway_. Send him to the reform school, I was going to say;
  then I remembered that wouldn’t do, for that of course is only for
  youthful offenders for whom there yet lingers hope of reformation.”

Speaking of boys, Mr. McBroom says:--

  “Now is the time of most urgent need that every safeguard and every
  vigilant precaution be thrown around them to save them from the vile
  habits and tendencies which they are exposed on every hand, and which
  if allowed to get their grip now, will handicap the boys all their
  lives, and in many cases ruin them for any further effective or
  ambitious effort.

  “Chief among these vices, because usually the _first_ to gain a
  foothold, is the use of tobacco; and that seems to be the _father_
  of all the rest. It _breeds deception_ at the very start, _in every
  single case_, I believe; bad company, and even worse meeting places;
  _dwarfed ambition, sluggish intellect_.

  “Now if the young man has any _capacity or inclination_ in the
  line of school work, we have the strongest possible appeal to his
  _pride and his ambition_ in telling him that the use of tobacco is
  absolutely ruinous to good scholarship. But the pupil will find a
  _fatal flaw_ in the logic if the superintendent himself uses tobacco;
  for almost inevitably in the mind of the pupil, the superintendent
  is a _notable example of high_ scholarship. The best teaching,
  except for some rudiments and routine of instruction is mostly a
  matter of intangible atmosphere; the _right kind of influence_,
  contact and association of the pupil with a _strong, clean, wholesome
  personality_ in the teacher. Now if superintendent or college
  professor or any other schoolman, has one _conspicuous weakness_;
  _one habit_ that is universally considered a bad habit, he fails in
  exactly the most important point; and though he may be strong as an
  _instructor_, _disciplinarian_, _administrator_, yet he will be weak
  as an _educator_, _as a maker of character_.

  “He may surround himself with a corps of strong, loyal young men
  and women, who will attend to the education of the pupils, while
  he attends to the administration of the system; but even then, his
  own influence in the development of character in the pupils will be
  zero or a negative quantity. Now that kind of influence might answer
  in the management of _a railroad_ or a _packing house_, but in the
  administration of a school it is _not good enough_.”

What can we say to the boys when they quote the example of physicians,
college professors, school superintendents, ministers of the gospel,
churchmen, and even their own fathers? Such men should read the
following statement with care:--

  “There is something about this Cigarette habit that weakens and
  unnerves the boy. It _destroys his memory_, impairs his other
  cognitive faculties, robs him of his power of attention, saps his
  will-power, and deprives him of his initiative; he _becomes tremulous
  and timid_, and fears to do the things he would.

  “Often this filthy and disgusting habit has so fastened itself upon
  the impressionable boy nature, that it can not be shaken off. _What
  base slavery!_ What bonds of vice that _eat like canker_ into the
  physical being of its victim!

  “Many physicians with whom I consulted in the matter have assured
  me of the effect of tobacco upon the growing boy, and all have
  regarded the Cigarettes as the most pernicious form of tobacco
  using. Do _college professors_, and _college men_, and other users
  of Cigarettes who are in a position to influence boys, ever think of
  their _responsibility_ for the bad example they give? How can advice
  to refrain from the Cigarette be heeded when it comes from one who
  is himself a user of the Cigarette?”--_Wm. H. DeLacy, Judge of the
  Juvenile Court, Washington, D. C._


_Boy Criminals and the Cigarette_

Judge Ben. B. Lindsey, of Denver, known as “The Boys’ Judge,” says:--

  “The Cigarette not only has a _grip upon boyhood_, but it invites
  _all other_ demons of habit to come and add to the _degradation_.”

Another writer says:--

  “There is no surer way for the young boy to procure as associates
  the criminal and immoral, than for him to begin the smoking of
  Cigarettes; the use of the Cigarette draws to him the older and more
  vicious who are ready to initiate him into that kind of life which
  paves his way to destruction.”

In testimony of the grip which the Cigarette habit obtains upon boys,
and its tendency to crime, read carefully the following statement from
Abraham Bowers, Immigration Secretary of the Y. M. C. A. of Chicago:--

  “It gives me pleasure to endorse the work of the Anti-Cigarette
  League. While I was teacher of the boys in the Cook County jail, I
  found that almost every one of them could attribute his downfall
  partly to the use of Cigarettes. They were the _most seriously
  afflicted_ with the habit of any class of boys I have ever known.
  They desired to have a recess every forty-five minutes to go outside
  the room to smoke a Cigarette. At night frequently about two or three
  o’clock in the morning, some of them would be _aroused from their
  sleep_ for the want of a Cigarette, and not having it they would
  _pound the cells_, and wake all the other boys and men in the jail,
  if necessary to get the Cigarettes. Many of them admitted that they
  had _been led to steal_ originally to get money with which to buy
  Cigarettes.”

The following statement is from the pen of Judge Leroy B. Crane, of New
York:--

  “Cigarettes are ruining our children, _endangering their lives_,
  dwarfing their intellects, and making them _criminals_ fast. The
  boys who use them seem to lose all sense of _right, decency, and
  righteousness_. To have great men requires the most forceful means to
  check this pernicious and death-dealing habit. Ask the mothers of
  the land to help you and they will respond.

  “In my court _ninety-five per cent_ of the boys brought before
  me charged with offenses from _shooting crap_ to _burglary_ are
  Cigarette smokers, while those who do not smoke them seldom appear
  before me.

  “This morning three boys were brought before me for petty larceny,
  the oldest eighteen, the youngest sixteen,--the stain of Cigarettes
  on their fingers, and the mothers there to accompany their boys.
  I was compelled to send one to the reform school at the mother’s
  request; the other two were placed on probation to give them another
  start.

  “I call Cigarettes Little White Devils. The U. S. government should
  pass laws preventing their sale and manufacture within its borders.”

Of the tendency of the Cigarette to promote crime and insanity, the
following experience will testify:--

  “Of all the juvenile criminals tried in my court, not _one for years_
  has been found free from the _stain of Cigarettes_ on his thumb
  and first two fingers. Of all the _lunatics_ tried in my court, an
  attempt is made to learn the cause of lunacy, and in _more than
  half_ Cigarette smoking is assigned as the cause.”--_Judge Balder,
  Louisville, Ky._

  “It does seem, as one stated, ‘that either the smoking of Cigarettes
  _causes insanity, or that it is the insane who smoke_.’”

Says Thomas A. Edison:--

  “Acrolein is one of the _most terrible drugs_ in its effect on
  the human body. The _burning_ of ordinary _cigarette paper always
  produces acrolein_. That is what makes the smoke so irritating.
  I really believe that it often _makes boys insane_. We sometimes
  develop acrolein in this laboratory in our experiments with
  glycerine. One whiff of it from the oven drove one of my assistants
  out of the building the other day. I _can hardly exaggerate the
  dangerous nature of acrolein_, and yet that is what a man or a boy is
  dealing with every time he smokes an ordinary Cigarette.”

  “_The blood of persons poisoned by the inhalation of illuminating
  gas_, rich in carbonic oxide, is found to be _coagulated_ and
  _indurated_, and may be pulled in strings from the _veins and
  arteries_.

  “Owing to the loose structure of the Cigarette, its combustion is
  modified and destructive distillation proceeds with combustion, and
  owing to the incompleteness of oxidation, carbonic oxide is largely
  produced instead of carbonic acid. This carbonic oxide inhaled into
  the lungs enters the blood unresisted, and the damage it does is
  in direct proportion to the quantities inhaled. _Carbonic oxide
  when inhaled in small quantities produces faintness, dizziness,
  palpitation of the heart, and a feeling of great heaviness in the
  feet and legs._ These are exactly the effects of the Cigarette and
  the depression and nervousness which follow as a reaction make the
  victim crave some balm or tonic for his malaise. He is then led to
  consume the drug in ever increasing quantities.”

Notice the following prison record:--

  “On the first day of this month we had 278 boys between the ages of
  ten and fifteen. Ninety-two per cent of the whole number were in the
  habit of smoking Cigarettes at the time they committed the crimes
  for which they were sent to the reformatory. Eighty-five per cent
  had become so addicted to their use as to be classed at the time
  as ‘Cigarette fiends.’ Of 4,117 boys received into the reformatory
  since its organization on June 8, 1893, ninety-five per cent were
  in the habit of using tobacco, and nearly all were Cigarette
  smokers. Consequently we see that the Cigarette is a great factor in
  developing criminals.”--_Hon. Geo. Torrence, formerly Superintendent
  of Illinois State Reformatory._

Reliable testimony:--

  “I regard the Cigarette as a _fuse of infernal_ fire, tending to
  explode the _worst passions of the body_! In dealing with more than
  sixteen thousand delinquent children during the last eight years,
  I find as a rule the user of Cigarettes is a _stunt, a weakling in
  body, mind, and morals_.”--_Zed H. Copp, Chief Probation Officer,
  Juvenile Court, Washington, D. C._


_Heart Tracings_

We invite your attention to the work of the delicate little instrument,
called the sphygmograph, which records the strength and regularity of
the heart beat. Notice the following tracings:--

[Illustration: _No. 1_

_No. 2_

_No. 3_

_No. 4_]

No. 1 shows a healthy heart beat. No. 2, the heart beat of a young man
while smoking. Where the mark ^ is, you will notice that the heart
skipped a full beat. No. 3, after smoking, with a partial skip in the
heart beat, even while under the stimulus of tobacco. No. 4, the heart
beat of a tobacco user.

The tobacco heart has become a prominent feature in the medical
diagnosis of the day.


_Danger to Growing Boys_

  This progressive use of the Cigarette is especially true with boys in
  the period of rapid growth. The wreath of Cigarette smoke which curls
  about the head of the growing lad _holds his brain_ in an _iron grip_
  which prevents it from growing and his mind from developing just as
  surely as the iron shoe does the foot of the Chinese girl.

  In the terrible struggle for survival against the deadly Cigarette
  smoke, development and growth are sacrificed by nature, which in the
  fight for very life itself, must yield up every vital luxury such as
  healthy body growth and growth of brain and mind.

  If all boys could be made to know that with every breath of Cigarette
  smoke they _inhale imbecility_ and _exhale manhood_; that they are
  tapping their arteries as surely and letting their life blood out as
  truly as though their _veins and arteries were severed_, and that the
  Cigarette is a maker of _invalids_, _criminals_, and _fools_--not
  men--it ought to deter them some. _The yellow finger stains_ is an
  emblem _of deeper degradation and enslavement than the ball and
  chain_.

    Hudson Maxim.

[Illustration: _Cigarette School Boy_]

[Illustration: _A Few Years Later_]


_Business Men and the Cigarette_

How do employers of men and boys rate the Cigarette smoker? Read the
following terse statements:--

  “We might as well go to the _insane asylum_ for our men as to employ
  Cigarette smokers.”--_The late E. H. Harriman, Railroad King._

  “Never advance the pay of a Cigarette smoker; never _promote him_;
  never _trust him_.”--_Elbert Hubbard._

  “More and more young men are hoisting the sign, ‘I am a fool,’ by
  appearing in public with a Cigarette.”--_P. M. Sharpless, Cream
  Separator Manufacturer._

  “The use of intoxicating liquor by men, and the use of Cigarettes
  by boys, is creating a race of _feeble-minded_, _unhealthy_, and
  _valueless citizens_.”--_John Wanamaker._

  “We do not employ boys in the Larkin office, who smoke Cigarettes. An
  applicant addicted to the use of Cigarettes would hardly interest us;
  but if he seemed to possess qualifications that made him desirable,
  he would have to _decide between Cigarettes and the job_.”--_Wm. R.
  Heath, Vice-President Larkin Company, Buffalo._

The notice which follows was posted throughout the factory of the
Cadillac Motor Company, Nov. 28, 1911:

  “Cigarette smoking is acquiring a hold on a great many boys in our
  community; the habit has grown to an abnormal extent among boys and
  men in the last year or two. Since it is such a bad practice, and is
  taking such a hold upon so many people, we think it a _disgrace_ for
  a grown man to smoke a Cigarette, because it is not only injurious to
  his health, but is such a _bad example_ to the boys.

  “Boys who smoke Cigarettes, we do _not care to employ_ or to _keep
  in our employ_. In the future _we will not hire any one_ whom we
  know to be addicted to this habit. It is our desire to weed it
  entirely out of our factory just as soon as practicable. We will ask
  every one in our factory who sees the seriousness of this habit to
  use his influence in having it stamped out. We have two objects in
  interesting ourselves in this matter. First, to help men and boys;
  second, _We believe that men who do not smoke Cigarettes or frequent
  saloons, can make better automobiles than those who do_.”

The following is an extract from the Fidelity, one of the oldest
insurance companies in America:--

  “After a careful investigation we have decided that we will not bond
  a man who uses Cigarettes, for such men _are not safe, physically or
  morally_.”

  “I verily believe that the _mental force_, _power of labor_, and
  _endurance_ of our profession is decreased at least twenty-five per
  cent by the use of tobacco.”--_Ex-Senator Doolittle, in an address
  delivered to the graduating law class of Wisconsin University._


_Cigarettes and Tuberculosis_

  The claim made by Surgeon General Rixey of the United States navy
  that the smoking of Cigarettes is responsible for many of the cases
  of _pulmonary tuberculosis_ that occur among the men of that body
  is an interesting one. _The Cigarette_ has long been considered a
  _dangerous luxury_, and taking into consideration the opinion of Dr.
  Rixey, the statement that during the past three months the crew of
  the ship Missouri--700 men--used _one thousand five hundred books of
  Cigarette papers_, _one thousand two hundred pounds of tobacco_ and
  _thirty-seven thousand Cigarettes_, the fact that the ratio of men
  suffering from _pulmonary troubles_ in _our navy is larger than in
  the navies of either Germany or England_, is not surprising. As a
  matter of precaution and common sense, this devotion to the Cigarette
  should at least be curbed to a very great extent.--_Washington Post._

  “It has been brought to the attention of the bureau from many
  sources,” says the surgeon general, “that Cigarette smoking is
  becoming a _serious impediment to robust health in the navy_. This
  habit seems to have taken a decided impetus in the service since the
  Spanish war and has spread to incredible proportions.”--_The Deadly
  Cigarette, Lucy Page Gaston._


_Leads to Drinking and Opium_

  Dr. Chas. L. Hamilton, of the Keeley Institute, says: “The continual
  _dryness_ of the mucous membranes of the mouth and pharynx, due to
  the _paralyzing influence_ of the Cigarette on the nerve terminals
  and which the drinking of water will not relieve, is readily quenched
  by _alcoholic drinks_, and this discovery, once made by the Cigarette
  habitue, leads to frequent indulgence in liquor, and aided by the
  effort to combat malnutrition and its attendant weaknesses, almost
  invariably causes him to become an _alcoholic inebriate_.”

  Also a quotation from Dr. B. Broughton, in charge of the opium
  department of the Keeley institute, Dwight, Ill.: “_More young men
  are led into the opium habit by Cigarette smoking_ than by patent
  and proprietary medicines. _Sixty per cent of all males_ under forty
  years of age, treated at Dwight for morphin, opium, or cocaine using
  in 1896 had been smokers of Cigarettes, and sixty per cent of these
  had no other excuse than that they needed some _stimulant_ more than
  the Cigarette furnished them.”

  “Our experience here at Dwight, where many hundreds of Cigarette
  cases have been treated, is that persons applying for treatment for
  both liquor and cigarettes dread giving up their Cigarette more
  than they do the liquor. Moreover, those who return to the use of
  Cigarettes in after-life, are almost certain to resume the use of
  liquor to allay the irritability of the nervous system produced by
  tobacco smoke inhalation.”--_Some Effects of Tobacco Using._


_Cigars and Fires_

  “Cigarettes for boys spell tragedy everywhere! The fire at Bangor
  last Sunday began with a careless smoker. The Baltimore fire, the
  Chelsea-Boston fire, the fire of the Windsor Hotel, New York, the
  Albany Statehouse fire, and the Horrible Triangle Waist Company
  holocaust, all of these, with charred human bodies, and wrecked
  homes and lives, are traced to the carelessness and brutal disregard
  accompanying the Cigarette habit.

  “Fire Commissioner Waldo attributes 700 fires per year in New York to
  this cause. The _tobacco companies_ deny the evil of their product,
  and invite inspection of their premises and processes. But a mere
  inspection of the Cigarette boys, in the public schools and factories
  ought to be enough!”--_Editorial in Religious Weekly._


_Dangers of Inhaling_

The following paragraphs are selected from “Confessions of a Cigarette
Smoker in England.”

  “Inhaling consists simply in drawing a _volume of smoke_ from the
  Cigarette into the mouth, and then taking a deep breath, in the act
  of which the smoke is carried from the mouth down into the lungs....

  “Let the nicotin fumes go where they may, in their passage they
  come into contact with the _nervous system_, and the result is an
  _instantaneous communication to the brain_, which takes the form of a
  momentary _semi-paralysis_--that is, when a man is new at the habit.

  “I remember very well the experience of a youngster of _eighteen_ on
  his being _taught to inhale_ the smoke of a Cigarette for the first
  time. One afternoon some _friends persuaded_ him to make the attempt,
  and he did so. Almost upon the instant he fell full length upon the
  floor in a _dead faint_; and his features became pallid, his _pulse
  faint and irregular_; and those about him were for a time in a great
  fright. A day or two later he tried to inhale again, with a result
  _not quite_ so bad; and he went on trying till now he is a _veritable
  slave_ to the habit.

  “A leading tobacconist in the city of London told me that in the
  space of five years he had seen _regular frequenters_ of his shop
  completely _broken down in mind and body_ through having contracted
  the inhaling habit; moreover, that some of them were in the cemetery
  who, he was convinced, need not have been there. Of course, the
  medical certificate did not give inhaling tobacco smoke as the cause.
  Very likely it said consumption. But I can quite believe, and so can
  any confirmed inhaler, that it was the Cigarette that was the cause
  of it all.

  “The moral of all this is a simple one. _Never upon any
  consideration_ be tempted to inhale for the first time. Probably this
  _initial attempt_ would lead to the establishment of the habit, with
  all the sad consequences I have enumerated. And, as I indicated at
  the outset, breaking away from it is such a difficult matter that
  _not one person in a thousand_ ever succeeds in the attempt. Inhaling
  is one of those habits which _can not be broken off by degrees_.
  The division must be drawn sharp and clean, and there must be no
  smoking of any sort. To the confirmed inhaler this system of cure is
  a painful one; but it is the only one I have known to succeed.”


_A Sure Cure_

  “I have found a way to cure Jimmy of smoking Cigarettes,” said Mrs.
  Maloney over the back fence to Mrs. O’Brien.

  “And what is that?”

  “By the laying on of hands. It is a great remedy and a sure cure.”




_A Campaign_

_for_

Better Books for the Young

[Illustration]


The world is flooded with the cheapest and most pernicious literature
for children and youth. Go with me to the book store and see if we can
find a sensible, illustrated book for the children. Notice the rotten
paper used, and the quality of the work in both printing and binding.
Who would think of buying such stuff for grown people?

But worse than all the rest is the nature of the literature contained
in many of these books. It is as unreal and meretricious as the
material is of poor quality and the workmanship bad. And right at
the time of life when character is forming for time and eternity,
the brains of these little people are filled with fairy stories, and
grotesque pictures of nondescript animals, and the impossible doings of
impossible people.

The effect on the impressible, unformed minds of the young is to create
unreal sentiments and a feverish imagination. Look at the eagerness
with which the little hands grasp the atrocious colored illustrations
of the Sunday newspaper.

People say the children must be amused. In this we agree, but claim
that it is not necessary to descend to this demoralizing stuff to
interest them. We claim that the things that are true, the things that
are uplifting, the things that will lay the foundation for a useful
education and training for life, can be made just as interesting for
these little men and women as is the stuff usually imposed upon them.

We must remember that the bad literature for the children is training
their impressible minds in wrong directions, and developing a dwarfed
character. No true education can be built upon such a foundation. It
must all be eradicated, and the evil effects overcome before there is
any hope for a proper, useful education. It will take years to do this;
it may never be accomplished. Many will carry through life and to the
grave the taint of these early lessons.

The Nashville Book Company was organized for the express purpose of
providing for the children and youth a clean, uplifting, educating, yet
intensely interesting literature. That our efforts have been successful
is attested by the eagerness with which the books are read and re-read
by the little men and women, and the influence for good the lesson
stories are having upon their lives, as attested by parents into whose
homes these books have found their way. The books now ready are:--


“_Tiger and Tom, and Other Stories for Boys._”

Suitable for boys from eight to twenty years of age, and for grown-ups
as well. Contains 224 pages, printed from new plates on good, heavy
paper, with more than one hundred illustrations, engraved expressly for
this book, many of which are full page, all printed in colors. Prices
and Bindings:--

  Vellum de Luxe Cloth, marbled edges,                            50 cts
  Paper Cover, in three colors,                                   25 cts


“_The King’s Daughter, and Other Stories for Girls._”

“Companion to Tiger and Tom.” Same styles and prices


“_Gospel Primer No. 2._”

Ninety-six pages of short, attractive Bible stories. Each page
a chapter. The chapters connect in forming a continued chain of
historical stories. For children from six to fifteen. Printed on heavy
paper, handsomely illustrated by over 100 engravings, printed in
colors, in the following styles of binding:--

  Red Vellum de Luxe Cloth, red edges, embossed in three
  colors,                                                         50 cts
  Board sides, cloth back, cover printed in three colors,         25 cts


“_Spring Blossoms._”

For children from four to ten. Contains Bible stories, interesting
stories from every-day life, puzzles, and drawing lessons. Printed from
large type, handsomely illustrated in colors. Sixty-four pages, each
double the size of “Tiger and Tom.” Bound in heavy board sides, cloth
back, cover beautifully printed in four colors,

  30 cts

=The _best_ selling line in America.=

       *       *       *       *       *

General and Local Agents wanted. Liberal discounts. Write for circulars
and terms.

Address, NASHVILLE BOOK COMPANY, Marshall, Michigan.




  Transcriber’s Notes

  Inconsistencies and errors in the source document have been retained,
  except as mentioned below. Where the source document uses illustrated
  capitals at the start of chapters, opening quote marks and other
  punctuation may be missing; these have not been added.

  Depending on the hard- and software used to read this e-book and on
  their settings, not all elements may display as intended.


  Changes made:

  Some obvious minor typographical and punctuation errors have been
  corrected silently.

  Page 42: closing quote marks moved from ...learned a lesson by
  this time, ventured Bertha.” to ...learned a lesson by this time,”
  ventured Bertha.

  Page 49: Closing quote mark inserted after ...pumped a nice fresh
  pail.

  Page 63: closing quote mark inserted before But the poor woman did
  not realize....

  Page 65: closing quote mark inserted after ...folly and dissipation
  by the poor prodigal.

  Page 71: ...a chap let of perishable flowers... changed to ...a
  chaplet of perishable flowers....

  Page 76: ...they have a bank of desposit... changed to ...they have a
  bank of deposit....

  Page 105: opening quote marks deleted from before Susan Bell’s heart
  beat very fast....

  Page 135: ...and minister’s preached... changed to ...and ministers
  preached....

  Page 138: closing quote mark inserted after ...the storm’s done for
  us,

  Page 142: Look here, Dainel, if you will promise me... changed to
  Look here, Daniel, if you will promise me....

  Page 145: opening quote mark inserted before I can now take up the
  mortgage,....

  Page 151: closing quote mark inserted after ...in the name of mercy,
  do promise,....

  Page 169: ...on her kness to help her... changed to ...on her knees
  to help her....

  Page 197: Quote marks inserted around I’d just like to hear anybody
  speak against him, I would; Her eager eyes ran hurridly... changed to
  Her eager eyes ran hurriedly....

  Page 198: ...God being by helper! changed to ...God being my helper!

  Page 225: opening quote marks inserted before I yield that much to my
  wife’s dislike... and before But you don’t know how it chokes her,....

  Page 247: closing quote mark added after ...in the administration of
  a school it is not good enough.

  Page 248: closing quote mark inserted after ...known as “The Boys’
  Judge,

  Page 250: Superintendent of Illinois Stale Reformatory changed to
  Superintendent of Illinois State Reformatory.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN THAT RUM MADE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


