The Project Gutenberg eBook of Rue
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Rue

Author: Laurence Housman


        
Release date: August 23, 2026 [eBook #79440]

Language: English

Original publication: London: At the Sign of the Unicorn, 1899

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/79440

Credits: Charlene Taylor, Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RUE ***
﻿




                                  RUE




                                  RUE

                                   BY

                                LAURENCE
                                HOUSMAN


                          LONDON: AT THE SIGN
                          OF THE UNICORN. 1899

              Chiswick Press: Charles Whittingham and Co.
                  Tooks Court, Chancery Lane, London.


                     “YOU MAY WEAR YOUR RUE WITH A
                              DIFFERENCE.”




                                CONTENTS


I

                                                                    Page

Never shall life clear utterance show                                  3

If all the needs in all the hearts                                     5

Life wrought me at the forge of death                                  6

Long through the night the new-born lamb                               7

If you must do the thing you fear                                      9

Oh, safely in my dreams you laid                                      11

The blood of Abel in me cries                                         12

With me early, with me late                                           13

Thou breast of all bright things, thou Earth                          14

Dear garden face, with eyes of dawn                                   16

With arms that oared at easy length                                   17

Amid this grave-strewn, flowerless place                              19

Dear love, when with a twofold mind                                   20

What know ye of the wounds of Christ                                  21

Grant that I have no other claim                                      22

Now that I know you, dear, by heart                                   23

You hear a blind man preach the light                                 24

Now day by day my love is set                                         25

Oh, Love, leave other hearts to fail                                  26

When we are parting face from face                                    27

Fair eyes, that never did offend                                      28

You, the dear trouble of my days                                      30

Two masks my fate reserves for me                                     31


II

Of old betwixt the gods and earth                                     35

Two breasts to her unhappy brood                                      36

The land’s arms loose me, and I taste                                 38

What farewell can I wish you now                                      39

Ah, no! beloved, you part not hence                                   40

Round this dark ship that bears me on                                 41

Dark to its nest the light has gone                                   42

The death-white horses crest and turn                                 43

Oh, like-unlike, a difference strange                                 44

Here where the Rome of nations stands                                 45

Where, perfected in flesh and bone                                    47

Great Mother, dwelling in the shade                                   49

In sackcloth shrouds they rise from rest                              51

To the Tree of Life on Judgment Day                                   52

Against my flesh Love hangs to die                                    53

How this sad place deserted grown                                     54

This is the grave which year by year                                  56

From these thy servants who behold                                    57

“Sing once for joy!” spake Love, and bowed                            59

Across these barren clods of clay                                     60

I, too, hear how the lover sings                                      62

Only two hands has Love to lend                                       63

Living, I feel the feet that tread                                    64

High overhead the clock that tolls                                    65

Life flutters from the wooded brow                                    66


III

O ghostly dawn, that whitenest now                                    71

Pale stranger, with the uplifted face                                 72

Now round you spreads and flows a rest                                73

Why dream for you, dear vanished friend                               74

The Soul bereaved, the Flesh defiled                                  75

Out of the heart of night a hand                                      76

So much strong weakness holds me bound                                77

Send forth Thy winds, O God, to blow                                  78

Ghosts of sweet wants, ye touch and leave                             79

Whenever blows a passing gust                                         80

Is living still my debt to thee                                       81

O Lord of Love, Who holdest light                                     82

Here name and date are worn away                                      83

Me did self-love or love most move                                    84

Though thou art changed, thou bearest whole                           85

Oh! strange, ’mid severance of love                                   86

Let not the love you learned on earth                                 87

Where my word fails thy word amends                                   88

Out of the earth that holds you bound                                 89

Spring comes with silent rush of leaf                                 91

The Earth her troubled seasons brings                                 93

As by the motion of her arc                                           94




                                   I


                     RUE

    Never shall life clear utterance show
      To melt the hearts of men:
    Hark back three thousand years, and know
      How tongues had labour then;

    When God, who gathers north and south
      To marvel at His ways,
    Opened of old the ass’s mouth,
      And filled it to His praise.

    But when Love bowed His Body whole
      To death, for the dark East,
    Then hung before men’s eyes a Soul
      More dumb than any beast.

    His lips, Who spake as no man spake,
      Nothing at all availed:
    They gave Him vinegar to take,
      And wagged their heads and railed.

    So ye, the seers, and ye that seek,
      Fellows with Him must be:
    Only the dumb of heart can speak,
      Or the blind think they see.


    IF all the needs in all the hearts
      Of all the world were one,
    We could afford to drop our parts
      Nor wait to watch the sun,

    Which counts the days that gather in
      Toward the wished-for end,
    Where pleasure can no more be sin,
      Nor friend want help of friend.

    But now how fast the coil of things
      Holds each man to his part,
    While here, with hidden wants, there clings
      To each an alien heart!

    Nor from myself can I be freed
      To lay me down and die,
    Because of all the hearts in need
      Of comfort less than I!


    LIFE wrought me at the forge of death,
      Love shaped my reins for sin:
    They stirred, to fodder me with breath
      The pit they digged me in.

    They bade me tasks that seemed to heal
      The bitter light of day:
    I fed the forge, I trod the wheel,
      And I built up the clay.

    And when upon no shifting sands
      My labour was grown whole,
    They laughed, and put into my hands
      A clean and human soul:

    And half undid the bands of fear
      That held me back from bliss,
    And daily whispered in my ear
      Their bidding, “Curse thou this!”


    LONG through the night the new-born lamb
      Utters its first complaint;
    Against the body of its dam
      The cry goes low and faint.

    Till faint against the dawn the birth
      Which bears a twilight’s span
    Shall pass, and let alone to earth
      The sorry needs of man.

    Now, ere the covering darkness yields,
      Lie down, dear lamb, lie down:
    Better to die here in the fields
      Than yonder in the town;

    Where fast before the butchering knife
      A dumb death thins the herd.
    Oh, better now to part from life
      While life seems worth a word!

    Out on the downs the shepherds cry,
      The silly sheep-dogs yelp:
    Then, quickly ease my heart, and die,
      Lest I should bring you help!


    IF you must do the thing you fear,
      I would I were the sin,
    To knock against your heart, my dear,
      Until you let me in!

    To sleep with you, and wake with you,
      Lie down with you, and rise,
    And let you feel the sunshine through
      My love upon your eyes.

    Oh, many a time you may prevail
      With God, and rise as white
    As you lay down; yet you shall fail
      Some solitary night!

    Then, lest the ill outlast the will,
      How well would serve a friend
    To devil for your heart until
      You meant the thing to end!

    For then, my dear, if I were there,
      I would not be your foe:
    You need but breathe the faintest prayer,
      And I would let you go.


    OH, safely in my dreams you laid
      Kind pardon on my heart,
    And fair amends to you I made
      While we stood far apart.

    But, now the far becomes the near
      And once again we meet,
    Sorrow so holds the heart, my dear,
      You may not hear it beat.

    A day ago, an hour, and now
      I longed to find you near;
    Now round me grow your arms, and now
      My heart has died for fear!

    And ghastlier thought takes shape behind,
      Lest, if I love you more,
    I some dark morning wake to find
      You dead against my door!


    THE blood of Abel in me cries,
      “Give me the curse of Cain;
    Let me have vengeance from the skies,
      Lest I be dead in vain!”

    Hot for deliverance I wait
      The cleaving of the clod:--
    Give me my murderer to hate,
      Lest hate go back to God!

    Or, if there be no strength above,
      Whence justice may be shed:--
    Give me my murderer to love,
      Since that will serve instead!


    WITH me early, with me late,
      The face of my spent youth:
    Of youth that made a friend of fate,
      And thought the friendship truth.

    But now ’tis--how to bear the sun!
      If fate demands, o’er all
    The ills I wish to do, the one
      I struggle to let fall.

    With me early, with me late,
      A bitter thing to rue:
    The wrong set down for me by fate,
      The wrong I would not do.


    THOU breast of all bright things, thou Earth,
      Where I was lapped ere day
    Drew me from darkness unto birth,
      Fair mother of my clay,

    Now night and day, where’er I go,
      I seem to hear thee cry,
    “O child, what hast thou learned to know
      Of signs beneath the sky?”

    And I bend down, and answer back,
      “I learn there is no rest,
    On sea or land, for those who lack
      The covering of thy breast.”

    Then she: “What hast thou there, weak heart,
      That will not let thee free?”
    “Dear grief, from which I cannot part,
      And love, too strong for me!

    “And dearer to my heart than rest
      This love that burns like fire;
    And closer than your breast the breast
      Of grief that quells desire!”


    DEAR garden face, with eyes of dawn,
      Where all my gladness grows,
    Now breaks upon your secret lawn
      The slumber of the rose.

    So while the dawn-fire flushes low
      To warm the world, oh, haste!
    Awake, arise, sweet breath, and blow
      Across this barren waste!

    Lest now the gates of my desire
      Undo their bolts of ice,
    Bidding me pass the sword of fire
      Which guards my Paradise.


    WITH arms that oared at easy length
      And buoyant draught of breath,
    When dawn threw out its shining strength
      Our bodies played with death.

    Fathom on fathom under foot
      The folded seas were deep:
    Where day drew forth its mandrake root,
      There under us lay sleep.

    Your dear arms faltered; your young eyes
      Caught half the daylight down:
    And “Quick!” you sobbed, in broken sighs,
      “Quick! help me, or I drown!”

    Help you? The sea lay full below
      Fathom on fathom deep,
    It was but one straight road to go:
      And in the sea lay sleep!

    So strong the wish: then, surely, brake
      The link that bound in me
    Body with soul;--that, for your sake,
      My soul gave up the sea!

    Whelmed beyond reach of any coast
      My body comes no more:
    Deep is its death. It is my ghost
      Has brought you back to shore.


    AMID this grave-strewn, flowerless place
      A dead man prays in stone:
    Worn with the weather, how the face
      Looks like a mask of bone!

    From praying feet to praying hands,
      Prayer will not let him go:
    Still patiently his face withstands
      God’s everlasting No.

    For still to all the plea he gives
      God’s word long since was said:
    And still the foolish faith outlives
      The mercy which lies dead.

    The praying stone wears down to dust;
      And every day that dies
    It proffers with a piteous trust
      The prayer that God denies.


    DEAR love, when with a twofold mind
      I pray for bitter grace;
    And from my pit of torment find
      Your breath upon my face,

    And hear you without thought of fear
      Bid me to guard you well,
    And guide your footsteps to win clear--
      When my feet walk in hell:

    I wonder, how can God be glad
      To hear men praise Him so,
    Who makes His piteous earth so sad
      A lot to undergo?

    Or does He too dip Feet in fire,
      And share the thirster’s thirst;
    And listen to man’s great desire
      Holding a Heart to burst?


    WHAT know ye of the wounds of Christ,
      Ye friends for whom He died?
    For you at least the love sufficed,
      When Love was crucified.

    For you, whose feet He plucked from hell,
      He perished not in vain:
    For you, when that He died, He fell
      That He might rise again.

    I watch the wounds: for me how vain
      The blood-drops from His side,
    Poor God, Who perished in His pain,
      Curst, spit upon, denied!

    Little ye know the pangs He bore,
      Ye friends whom Love forgave:
    There was a bitterer wound He wore
      For souls He could not save.


    GRANT that I have no other claim,
      Condemned in all I do:
    Of every deed I bear the blame,
      Proved false to all but you.

    Most false to this now piteous me,
      That, of itself bereft,
    Strives to have loss that gain may be;
      And, robbed, commits the theft.

    And yet not false, whate’er befall,
      If truth be found in you.
    So, since you are my all in all,
      Am I not all proved true?


    NOW that I know you, dear, by heart,
      This kinship makes us one;
    Yet nearness puts us more apart,
      More dear, but more undone.

    For while you tell me of your grief,
      Such sorrow finds me old:
    Your breath hath stirred a withered leaf,
      And cast it to the mould.

    Thus, of the years that lie before,
      I from my darkness guess
    How I must know you more and more,
      And you must know me less.

    And while my heart responsive hears
      Your inmost griefs unclose,--
    How fast the covering silence rears!
      How deep the secret grows!


    YOU hear a blind man preach the light
      Wherein he never dwelt,
    Because his hands can handle right
      The darkness that is felt.

    O Face of Love, to which I kneel,
      What likeness lies between
    This touch of hands outstretched to heal,
      These lips that cry “unclean”?

    But when these hands have hold on fire,
      And these lips fire for breath,
    And life goes down to its desire
      In the red pit of death:

    Then, clear of sight in that far place,
      I may lift eyes above,
    And see you looking in God’s Face,
      O face I used to love!


    NOW day by day my love is set
      To make the severance grow;
    By speech to hold you fast, and yet
      Mutely to bid you go.

    By all I will to all I would,
      I to our parting press,
    And seek by signs half understood
      To make you love me less.

    And while you stay and trust me still,
      Fear leaps upon my heart,--
    Lest, in the dark ways of His will,
      God means us not to part!


    OH, Love, leave other hearts to fail;
      Our love shall arch the skies!
    And other loves through ours prevail,
      When we have closed our eyes!

    Surely the day to which we win
      Draws on through hours of dread,
    To close the covering darkness in,
      And hold us in one bed.


    WHEN we are parting face from face
      Each to a destined end,
    I know that God shall find no trace
      In you of me, your friend.

    There where I trod the way was wide,
      With room enough for two;
    And yet I put you from my side,
      That God might look on you:

    And I have bowed Him from His height
      To take this gift of me,
    That pure and holy for His sight
      I left you utterly.

    For single as the Heart of God,
      My heart that loved you well
    Died for you all the while I trod
      The downward path to hell.


    FAIR eyes, that never did offend
      Love for you that grew blind,
    Say, have you found in me the friend
      That you have need to find?

    Or have I failed, who day by day
      Forbore to reach my end,
    Because of looks that seemed to say--
      “Stay with me; be my friend!”

    And I, to meet your lesser need,
      Gave mine;--a dear exchange!
    Now, if you saw my eyes indeed,
      How you would find them strange!

    Dear love, try to be content:
      Long since for you I died;
    And still to cheer your heart there went
      A stranger at your side.

    Now, wish me well, and pass me by!
      Soon shall my rest be deep,
    When full upon my eyes shall lie
      The desert sands of sleep.


    YOU, the dear trouble of my days,
      When life shall let me cease,
    Turn once aside from kinder ways
      And look upon my peace!

    Let your feet rest upon my roof,
      And for the love we bore,
    Forgive the heart, so far aloof,
      You cannot trouble more.

    For, if the dead man had his will,
      I doubt not he would rise,
    And waste his soul in sorrow still
      With looking on your eyes.

    So come when you have lost your power,
      And pardon my release:
    And set your feet to rest an hour,
      A seal upon my peace.


    TWO masks my fate reserves for me,
      Whichever way I fare:
    Then, must the easier mask not be
      The better one to wear?

    For here indeed the mask fits well;
      But oh, the weary pact!
    How I must mouth, and strut, and swell,
      To while away the act!

    But then, the ease to bitter breath,
      The stay to wordy strife,
    When I put on the mask of death,
      And drop the mask of life!

    And death will lay an easier grace
      Than life around my head:
    You will not understand my face
      The better when I’m dead.




                                   II


    Of old betwixt the gods and earth
      High-headed, girt with cloud
    Dividing misery and mirth,
      Old Atlas stood and bowed.

    Close to the high celestial gate
      He bent a drowsy brain:
    While far below his feet set weight
      On furrowed fields of pain.

    The earth’s far cry sang faint, and dim
      Her face toward him grew:
    His head was crowned with light; round him
      The immortal laughters flew.

    And yet he tired of that high place,
      And thrust away the prize:
    Lifting a dead, indignant face
      Of stone toward the skies.


    TWO breasts to her unhappy brood
      Uplifts our mother Earth,
    And tenders to their cry for food
      Her ministry of dearth.

    So, wistfully from breast to breast
      She draws the lips that crave;
    And lies importunately pressed
      By mouths she may not save:

    As if her violated clay,
      Sown with unnatural seed,
    Had by some god’s despotic sway
      Given forth a monster breed.

    So half her breast she shrouds in leaves
      To hide the piteous scars;
    And half, a barren breast, she heaves
      And bares to all the stars.

    O mother, lift me from the land,
      And give me breast by sea;
    And leave me room where I may stand
      And starve unnursed by thee!


    THE land’s arms loose me, and I taste
      The full draught of the sea:
    Out of the flesh and all its waste
      A spirit plucks at me.

    O spirit, brooding on the waves,
      Blow through me with thy breath;
    And bear me to the unmounded graves
      Which thou hast smoothed for death!

    And in the welcome of thy smile,
      Old furrowed face of dearth,
    Fold me, and let me for a while
      Forget my mother earth.


    WHAT farewell can I wish you now,
      Of all farewells the best?
    Love, if my lips no words allow,
      There must confession rest:

    Against this lonely heart to tell
      The best wish that may be:
    Oh, may you, if you would fare well,
      Fare well away from me!


    AH, no! beloved, you part not hence:
      In the most middle night,
    I hold close gathered to each sense
      Love that outpasses sight.

    Out of this coil is no escape;
      And naught can parting do!
    I look upon too like a shape,
      Love, when I look on you.

    So let me bear until I die
      An undeparting guest:
    O face of love, come back and lie
      In shadow on my breast!


    ROUND this dark ship that bears me on
      There broods a wasteful calm;
    As though it breathed from Avalon,
      The sea-breeze pours its balm.

    And night and day beside the ship
      There walks upon the wave
    A form I know, with prayer on lip,
      And hands too weak to save.

    Yet, should I stoop my lips to drain
      The draught they long for best,
    Those hands would have me fast again
      And snatch me back from rest.


    DARK to its nest the light has gone;
      An unseen force prevails,
    And hands of storm lay hold upon
      The rigging and the sails.

    High heaves the heart of night, and loud
      The water sobs and breaks,
    And overhead one helmet-cloud
      Its cap of darkness makes.

    Strong wants whereto the welkin moves,
      They are but waifs like me;
    And all a storm of severed loves
      That strain across the sea!


    THE death-white horses crest and turn,
      Their gleaming saddles glide:
    Have I no senses to discern
      The riders as they ride?

    O death-white horse, in this dark race
      Outcresting all your crew,
    With foaming flank, and furious pace,
      Who is it rides on you?

    Nay, follow not so hard on me,
      Who ride to death alone:
    White horse, pace gently, lest I see
      Your rider overthrown!


    OH, like-unlike, a difference strange
      Your soul from mine divides:
    Out of one prison-house we range
      To follow different guides.

    And led by hands of death or birth
      To live again or die,
    Severed by all the paths of earth
      Our fates divided lie.

    And still ’twixt life and death I ask
      The Darkness named divine,
    Why bound He in so fair a mask
      A soul so close to mine?


    HERE where the Rome of nations stands
      On mounds of buried breath,
    Sits one who holds in hollow hands
      The keys of life and death.

    Oh, heavy come the poor in heart,
      And rich return they home;
    Since well performs his proper part
      The middleman of Rome!

    About the holy beaten ground
      The nations on their knees
    Hark, while with apostolic sound
      Loud creak the golden keys.

    And, though the hingeless doors be dumb,
      With solemn hand and show
    The porter lets the weak man come,
      And lets the strong man go.

    But while he spreads his lavish hands
      Across the hill-tops seven,
    Dark Angelo like Atlas stands
      Dividing earth from Heaven.


     In the Sistine Chapel

    Where, perfected in flesh and bone,
      Earth’s crowned creation ends:
    There with a universal groan
      The cry of life ascends.

    To Heaven’s dark doors soul bound in sense
      Has pushed its furthest cry,--
    “Reach down, O Lord, and take us hence
      That neither live nor die!

    “Thou, that hast shaped our suffering thus,
      Grant us this last relief:
    Be sorry now, and loose from us
      The glory and the grief!

    “Since Thou hast given us to corrupt
      Flesh and fair earth, now scan
    Thy making, surfeited and supped,
      Thy maggot-worker, man!”

    O Counsel-Darkener, over me
      Still let Thy glooms expand;
    More darkness, Lord!--lest I should see
      Thy Face, and understand!


    GREAT Mother, dwelling in the shade
      Of altars, over glooms
    Monastic, where long prayer is made
      By dead men out of tombs:

    Thou hearest how thy barren sons
      For life’s denial beseech:
    Yet some of those were fruitful once,
      Their lips found flowers to reach.

    Therefore, to cheer their hearts, send down,
      Even to the lowest place,
    Thy mother-word from that fair Town
      Where loves come face to face.

    ’Mid shadowing of celestial doves
      Bring pity to the dead,
    O Thou Madonna of the loves
      Of hearts that could not wed!

    But here, O Maiden of the East,
      To me Thy voice is dumb;
    Unto thy final gathering-feast
      My love can never come.

    For I am bound to other marts
      Where meagre are Love’s doles,
    And men lay by their broken hearts,
      But not their broken souls.


    IN sackcloth shrouds they rise from rest;
      They pray from bleeding knees:--
    Ah, Christ! what grapes of love grow pressed
      Against the lips of these?

    Out of the smitten flesh and bone,
      Old heats of earlier days,
    A blood-red vintage fills with moan
      The wine-press of Thy praise.

    Which at Thy feast being lifted up
      Before celestial eyes:--
    What ghosts out of the bloody cup,
      What ghosts of men must rise!


    TO the Tree of Life on Judgment Day
      Spake the poor poison-tree,
    “Within my sap came death to stay
      When life first looked on me.

    “But from thy boughs there went a breath,
      Thy shadow on me fell:
    And nothing have I done for death,
      Because I loved thee well.

    “So I was barren for thy sake,
      Though little else I did:
    Here, Lord, as in a napkin take
      The talent that I hid!

    “Now am I weary: therefore shift
      The burden of thy breath;
    Have back again thy bitter gift,
      Who gavest life to Death!”


    AGAINST my flesh Love hangs to die
      As on the accursèd tree:
    I am the rood where he lays by
      His wronged humanity.

    The wounds which pierce the hands of Love,
      Driven by the hands of hate,
    Stand also in my flesh to prove
      The bitterness of fate.

    Here Love lies dying on my breast,
      His sorrow half laid by:
    Soon shall he enter to his rest,
      When, ah, no rest have I!


     An empty Hermitage

    How this sad place deserted grown
      Speaks of an old despair:
    In ghostly dints the weary stone
      Is hollowed out with prayer;

    As if each day, where lips of dearth
      Cried for a barren clod,
    Some want had worn the face of earth,
      Since not the Face of God.

    Who knows in what dark anguish ailed
      Yon soul of flesh and bone?
    The prayer, because the spirit failed,
      Hath carved itself in stone.

    O hollow stone, of hollow prayer
      You make a weary jest:
    For prayers that failed did earth prepare
      This hollow place of rest?


     The Holy Sepulchre

    This is the grave which year by year
      Gives up its ghostly dead:
    Of all poor graves least rest is here,
      Where Love laid down his head!

    The heart’s desire of heart-sick lands
      How shall men leave alone?
    Therefore they come with pious hands
      And roll away the stone.

    So year by year, as dawn brings gloom
      To light, and earth waits dumb,
    Uneasy from the open tomb
      The ghostly Easters come.


     A Prayer to the giver of Evil

    From these thy servants who behold
      Thy face continually,
    To whom I gave sad gifts of gold;--
      Shall this my guerdon be?

    Since once I served them, wasting so
      My substance at their board,
    Have they no broken meats to throw
      The beggar of their lord?

    Thy swine, they lack not to be fed,
      Though I stand famished by;
    And all thy hirelings eat thy bread,
      When I for hunger die!


    The meats stand ready to be carved,
      The sparkling wines are spiced:
    Then, give me room, lest I be starved
      Back to the Feet of Christ!


    “SING once for joy!” spake Love, and bowed
      His light toward my face,
    From that deep covering of cloud
      Which is his dwelling-place.

    I lifted up my heart, and sang;
      And far aloft went loud
    A shuddering note of joy which sprang
      To kiss the upper cloud.

    But on that fair celestial tent
      My praises cast a stain:
    The cloud that was Love’s covering rent
      And poured itself in rain.


    ACROSS these barren clods of clay
      Whenever a wind blows,
    Between them and the warmth of day,
      Stir shadows of the rose.

    There, while the roses dance in air
      And light winds whisper round,
    Below them shadows foot to share
      A ghostly dance on ground.

    How coldly feels that barren bed
      Those motions of delight!
    It cares not if the rose be red,
      Or if the rose be white.

    For be the roses white as snow,
      Or be they red as shame,
    With ghostly footsteps to and fro
      Their shadows walk the same.

    “Alas!” complains the barren clod,
      “Their dance is never done:
    And all their duty is to nod
      Between me and the sun!”


    I, TOO, hear how the lover sings
      Love like a flower unfurled;
    I hear the viols, the flutes and strings
      Of this great moaning world.

    I feel the innumerable dance
      Tingle beneath my tread;
    I see the season’s happy chance,
      And grain-fields harvested.

    I, too, could sing had I not this
      To bind upon my brain,
    That all these myriad notes of bliss
      Make one great voice of pain:

    That, though I lay all sorrow by
      And make glad songs my own,
    They will not lessen as they die
      The universal moan.


    ONLY two hands has Love to lend
      The many hands that plead,
    Only one heart where to befriend
      All kindred hearts in need.

    Eyes, lips, and hands, cannot suffice
      To comfort the sick earth,
    Whose children bear the hard device
      And bondage of their birth.

    But one illimitable share
      Is theirs, that all who will,
    In want and weakness and despair
      Can take their utmost fill:

    One gift that brings a sure relief
      To toiling human breath,
    That through a thousand wounds of grief
      Each heart may bleed to death.


    LIVING, I feel the feet that tread
      My burial-plot of ground,
    As if they grudged the tired dead
      A sleep that is too sound.

    Tread softly, you, and you, for I,--
      Truly I know you not!
    Leave, where the dead man has to lie,
      The quiet of his lot.

    But if, at crossing of love’s ways,
      Feet from a distant land
    Stood now, where after many days
      I shall come, not to stand;

    Then there would grow a light above
      This darkness of my breast,
    And I should know the feet I love
      Had touched my place of rest.


    HIGH overhead the clock that tolls
      The passing knell of noon
    Suspends its sentence, and there rolls
      No prelude of its tune.

    The heavy minute-hand creeps in,
      And hard upon the hour
    The other hand keeps hold to win
      The voices from the tower.

    Till half they seem like faring feet
      Toward that destined spot
    Where the two hands of Time shall meet
      On me, and I be not.

    Oh, let my brain get quit of power,
      And let the word be soon,
    When iron hands shall clasp the hour
      That cries my note of noon!


    LIFE flutters from the wooded brow,
      A slow breath sadly drawn:
    With gray wings beating comest thou,
      Shy heron of the dawn!

    And ever on from deep to deep
      Of space the errand flies,
    And breaks in starry pools of sleep
      The dreams of lover’s eyes.

    Then on until, where east is west,
      Still westward called away,
    On weary feathers sinks to rest
      A tender-breasted day.

    And once again I dream how light
      Across the breasts of space
    Goes moving onward into sight
      Of one belovèd face;


    Till cold across the ashen east
      Returns the gray-winged day:
    And, beak and claws flushed red from feast,
      There hangs a bird of prey!




                                  III


    O Ghostly dawn, that whitenest now
      The chilly-breathing earth,
    This face of life why liftest thou,
      If death be brought to birth?

    Can there be any death to live,
      Or any life to die,
    Unknown to me, that thou canst give
      To put my darkness by?

    Pale mother, from between thy feet
      Cometh a still-born day,
    Where life and I can never meet
      Till light be put away.


    PALE stranger, with the uplifted face
      That seals its looks at me,
    Come you to fill the empty place
      Where love was wont to be?

    In your dull heart without alarms
      If any love abide,
    Reach up and take me in your arms
      And draw me to your side!

    Or else, by what deep purpose stayed,
      To what diviner end,
    Grows this defeat, where fate hath made
      A stranger of my friend?

    For I am like a withered brook
      Which water runs not through,
    Since Death hath laid a dear rebuke
      On all my thoughts of you.

    Now round you spreads and flows a rest
      From which no word can come.
    Whom have you there for secret guest,
      Now that your lips are dumb?

    Death holds the heart that used to beat
      For me; he holds your breath;
    He has you fast from face to feet.
      Ah, would that I were death!


    WHY dream for you, dear vanished friend,
      The peace on earth denied,
    Since life, to gain a broken end,
      Has torn you from my side?

    The ramparts of the house of Death
      Love cannot pierce or scale,
    To tell with what a thirst for breath
      The silent captives ail.

    In that fixed prison-house of form,
      All locked and barred about,
    Perchance your living will is warm
      And battles to be out!


    THE Soul bereaved, the Flesh defiled,
      Made strife with Love, and said,
    “Lord, is not mine the living child?
      And is not hers the dead?”

    And while with piteous plea the two
      At hard contention warred,
    To search the holier anguish through
      Up glanced the dreadful sword.

    Then the sad Flesh, the far-defiled,
      Caught at Love’s Feet, and said,
    “Give her, give her the living child!
      And give me back the dead!”

    “Believest thou the dead can rise?
      O Flesh, behold thy son!"--
    Love spake: and to her opening eyes
      Living and dead were one!


    OUT of the heart of night a hand
      Of darkness touched my side:
    Light of my life, I saw you stand,
      And dreamed you had not died.

    “Oh, you look weary, you look old,
      And heavy hangs your head:
    Come from the night and from the cold,
      And creep into my bed!”

    The Fates that leagued against us still
      Had fallen apart in fear,
    When warm to all my weary will
      I thought to draw you near:

    But my quick soul, to love denied,
      Smote on its doors in pain:
    “Go back awhile, Beloved,” it cried,
      “And die, and come again!”


    SO much strong weakness holds me bound
      I scarce may lift a hand:
    Now being come to holy ground
      I have not strength to stand.

    For the dear loss to which I cling
      So shadows all the past,
    That life would seem too bare a thing
      Could I look up at last.

    O Lord of Light, Who fashionest form,
      Grant me no quickening sight!
    Make not the wants within me warm,
      But bid me look on night.


    SEND forth Thy winds, O God, to blow
      The fever from my brain;
    Let all Thy rains and rivers flow
      To wash away my stain!

    And when of all its thousand ills
      My body is set free,
    Then in Thy mercy bid the hills
      Bow down and cover me.

    And smother out this vital spark
      That binds me in Thy sight:
    Give darkness, that it may be dark,
      And heal my eyes of light!


    GHOSTS of sweet wants, ye touch and leave
      An unresponsive breast!
    Hearing you knock and go, I grieve,
      But cannot give you rest.

    Ye, while on earth the spring goes round,
      Dear wants, can never die.
    Now all my spring is underground,
      Therefore no wants have I!

    Oh, fare ye well, and sup at life,
      And find a better bed!
    Here living is a weary strife
      When all its wants are dead.


    WHENEVER blows a passing gust,
      I think your ghost goes by;
    Wailing it sifts away the dust
      Wherein I long to lie.

    Oh, shadow of my missing mate,
      Now pass, and give me rest!
    Your ghostly pity comes too late
      To drive me from your breast.


    IS living still my debt to thee
      Through whom all joy lies dead?
    Have you no welcome yet for me
      In your most quiet bed?

    Alas, now you have come to rest;
      And I have come to grief!
    Your love is harder than I guessed
      To grudge me that relief.


    O LORD of love, Who holdest light,
      Hear Thou the darkened speech;
    Behold the eyes that know not sight
      The hands that vainly reach.

    Thou knowest all; Thou wilt not grieve
      If in the ways of grief
    I speak amiss. Lord, I believe;
      Help thou mine unbelief!

    For as the east is from the west,
      And from the north the south,
    So from the sorrow of his breast
      The utterance of man’s mouth.


     A Prayer for stone to cry out

    Here name and date are worn away,
      Yet stiff upon its shelf
    The stony mummer all the day
      Lies praying to himself.

    O stone, thou mockest God with prayer,
      So praying without end,
    If he, whose dust became thy care,
      Hath found in God his friend!

    O stone, since other needs pass by,
      Let my need nearer be:
    Still lift to heaven the sightless eye
      Of faith, and pray for me!


    ME did self-love or love most move,
      Strong will or weak desire?
    Or was love laid on me to prove
      How ice may vanquish fire?

    Nay, still my heart cannot undo,
      My lips cannot unsay,
    That bitter need I had of you,
      And could not put away!

    But life from death strange virtue draws;
      And, knit with new desire,
    Still the love lives in me, though thaws
      The ice, though faints the fire.

    For life which out of good or ill
      Besought one kindred boon,
    Here, on death’s wave, how clear and still
      The waters wash the moon!


    THOUGH thou art changed, thou bearest whole
      My love through all thy change:
    Thou canst not shake me from thy soul
      Wherever thou dost range.

    So thou from change to change must mount,
      And still in mind of me
    Shalt come toward the living Fount
      Of immortality.

    Then from thy face, whom God makes free
      To touch the eternal years,
    Those waters in a mystery
      Shall wash away my tears.


    OH! strange, ’mid severance of love
      New love compelling grows!
    Whose Face is this that bends above?
      Whose wounded Hands are those?

    Fair Father Christ, I cannot tell
      When else on earth we met:
    A dearer love that loved me well
      Hath hold upon me yet.

    But if Thou lov’st the face I love,
      Whose likeness dwells in me,
    I will but keep one love above
      The love I’ll have for Thee!


    LET not the love you learned on earth
      Slip ever from your heart:
    Into your new celestial birth
      Let old love bear a part!

    So pray, that, though I fall and fall,
      And though God’s mercy fail,
    And though the Saints stay silent all,
      Your prayer shall yet prevail!


    WHERE my word fails thy word amends,
      With Paradisal speech:
    Thy prayer goes up to further ends
      Than I have thought to reach.

    Till, past all speech, where fails thy prayer
      ’Mid sights thou canst not read,
    Some other, on the ascending stair
      Strains out fresh hands to plead.

    But I, left conscious of my sin,
      Wait on, and watch, and wear,
    To know when word of me shall win
      The slow-ascending stair:

    And cry, “Have seven times seven sufficed
      To bridge the gulfs that part?"--
    When suddenly the Hand of Christ
      Has knocked against my heart!


    OUT of the earth that holds you bound
      All spring comes back to me;
    The honeyed world awakes at sound
      Of life the quickening bee.

    So from the eater comes forth meat,
      And sweetness from the strong:
    And honey from beneath my feet
      Where you to earth belong.

    O love, to you I bend and pray,
      Who seeing yet am blind,
    Because I cannot put away
      A dead face out of mind.

    Through the dull mould of my desire
      I search with hands that grope,
    ’Mid ashes of a buried fire,
      For love, or faith, or hope.

    Lest here I perish without end,
      Having no wit to see,--
    O ghost of all dead springs, O friend
      Of love, arise in me!


    SPRING comes with silent rush of leaf
      Across the earth and cries,
    “Lo, Love is risen!” But doubting Grief
      Returns, “If with mine eyes

    “I may not see the marks, nor reach
      My hand into His side,
    I will not hear your lips that preach
      Love raised and glorified.

    “Except by all the wounds that brake
      His heart, and marred His brow
    Most grievously for sorrow’s sake,
      How shall I know Him now?”

    Love came, and said, “Reach hither, Grief,
      Thy hand into My side:
    Oh, slow of heart to win belief,
      Seeing that for grief I died.

    “Lo, all the griefs of which I died
      Rise with Me from the dead!”
    Then Grief drew near, and touched the side,
      And touched the wounds that bled,

    And cried, “My God, O blessed sign,
      O Body raised, made whole,
    By this I know that Thou art mine,
      Upholder of my soul!”


    THE Earth her troubled seasons brings;
      Low at Love’s feet she lays
    The broken promise of her springs,
      Her tarnished summer days;

    And says of all, “Not here the gift:
      But out of all of these
    Draw Thou, for one too weak to lift,
      An offering to Thy knees!

    “And gather out of all the storms
      That flew to find them rest,
    The loves that in a hundred forms
      Have strained toward Thy breast!”


    AS by the motion of her arc
      The moon draws up the sea,
    So, through the sense-defeating dark
      Love’s hold is laid on me;

    Till, in the strife of hearts that yearn
      A hidden goal to gain,
    I touch the keys of life, and learn
      The mysteries of pain;

    And find one law uplifted chief
      All other laws above,
    That Earth cannot contain its grief,
      Nor Heaven contain its love.

    There, where Love’s moon unveils her snow
      On Paradisal trees,
    Deep at her inmost heart must go
      The beat of far-off seas.

    And led through hands of death or birth
      To live again or die,
    Gathered from all the griefs of earth
      All loves as kindred lie.

    So, clear of sight from this far place
      I can lift eyes above
    And see you looking in God’s Face,
      O face I used to love!


The author has to thank Messrs. Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co., for
permission to reprint the portion of these poems which first appeared
in “All Fellows,” Mr. Grant Richards for the use of the poem which
appeared in “The Little Land,” and the Editors of the “Spectator,”
“Outlook,” and “Dome,” for the poems which were first printed in those
publications.


Chiswick Press:--Charles Whittingham and Co.
Tooks Court, Chancery Lane, London.

       *       *       *       *       *

AT THE SIGN THE UNICORN.


POETRY.

=SHADOWS AND FIREFLIES.= By LOUIS BARSAC Med. 16mo, cloth,
gilt, 2_s._ 6_d._ net. _Second Edition._

THE OUTLOOK.--“Mr. Barsac has a genuine gift of expression and
a refined sense of natural beauty.”

=THE LITTLE CHRISTIAN YEAR.= Med. 16mo, white parchment, gilt top,
2_s._ 6_d._ net.

THE PALL MALL GAZETTE.--“Brief poems that are signed
everywhere with the sensitive signature of intellectual emotion.... The
author’s singular quality of poetry.”

=WILLOW LEAVES.= By RUSSELL VEITCH. Med. 16mo, gilt top, 2_s._
6_d._ net.

THE WESTERN MERCURY.--“A really excellent volume of verse ...
natural and effective.”

=IN THE WAKE OF THE SUN.= By FRED G. BOWLES. Med. 16mo, gilt
top, 2_s._ 6_d._ net.

THE STAR.--“The Unicorn Press is to be congratulated on
publishing a new lyrical poet of considerable originality and charm,--a
poet, I think, to be taken seriously.... It has haunted me, sung
itself again to me in omnibuses, hummed like a friend in crowded
thoroughfares.... I think these quotations bear me out in claiming for
Mr. Bowles a place among contemporary poets.”

=POEMS AT WHITE-NIGHTS.= By GORDON BOTTOMLEY. Med. 16mo, gilt
top, 2_s._ 6_d._ net.

THE OUTLOOK.--“Power and spiritual significance, and even a
contribution to religious knowledge, lie in these poems.”

=THE VINEDRESSER and OTHER POEMS.= By T. STURGE MOORE. Fcap.
8vo, cloth gilt, 2_s._ 6_d._ net.

THE LONDON LETTER.--“He has achieved his difficult feat
miraculously.... A poem written in English in 1899 in which the
very spirit of the ancient world resides. It reads like a splendid
translation from some richly-coloured Greek original.”

=OTHER PEOPLE’S WINGS.= By T. W. H. CROSLAND. Fcap. 8vo. 6_d._
net; cloth gilt, 1_s._ net.

THE OBSERVER.--“His ‘Parables’ made us aware of his strong
gift; his ‘Parodies’ make us endorse our earlier opinions.”

       *       *       *       *       *

=A “LIBER JUNIORUM."= £5 5_s._ net. Lithographed Drawings by WILL
ROTHENSTEIN of Aubrey Beardsley, W. B. Yeats, Laurence Binyon, Max
Beerbohm, Laurence Housman, and Stephen Phillips, in buckram Portfolio.
After 50 copies of each had been printed (by Way, on handmade Van
Gelder paper), the stones were destroyed. The Prints are all Signed and
Numbered Proofs, and may be had separately at One Guinea each. _A few
remain._

=WESTERN FLANDERS.= By LAURENCE BINYON. With Ten Etchings by
WILLIAM STRANG. Columbier 4to, (17 × 12). 250 Numbered Copies
only. Printed at the Chiswick Press on handmade Van Gelder paper. £2
2_s._ net.

Twenty Sets of Proof Etchings signed by the Artist are for sale.
Particulars on application.

THE SATURDAY REVIEW.--“Mr. Binyon has put a great deal of
delicate work into his writing.”

LITERATURE.--“The etchings have all the charm which one has
learnt to associate with Mr. Strang’s name.”


=THE DOME.= An Illustrated Magazine of Literature, Music, Architecture,
and the Graphic Arts. Monthly, 1_s._ net.

“The Dome” is quite unlike the typical magazine of the moment.

THE PALL MALL GAZETTE says: “There is so much that is fresh,
so much that is fine, in the work of the younger school of poets,
painters, writers, and etchers, that no one of an artistic taste can
afford to ignore this unique publication.”




THE ARTIST’S LIBRARY.

Edited by LAURENCE BINYON.

=HOKUSAI.= By C. J. HOLMES. Fcap. 4to. With Twenty full-page
Plates (Four in Colours). 2_s._ 6_d._ net.

THE MANCHESTER GUARDIAN.--“The first of what promises to be an
admirable series.... Mr. Holmes does full justice to his subject.”

=GIOVANNI BELLINI.= By ROGER E. FRY. Fcap. 4to. With Three
Photogravures and Twenty full-page Plates. 2_s._ 6_d._ net.

=ALTDORFER=, by T. STURGE MOORE; =COZENS=, by LAURENCE
BINYON; =GOYA=, by WILL ROTHENSTEIN; =CRANACH=, by
CAMPBELL DODGSON; =ALFRED STEVENS=, by D. S. MACCOLL;
=CONSTABLE=, by C. J. HOLMES; and =VANDYCK=, by LIONEL
CUST are in preparation.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A BOOK OF GIANTS.= Drawn, Engraved, and Written by WILLIAM
STRANG. Fcap. 4to, 2_s._ 6_d._ net.

=AUBREY BEARDSLEY.= By ARTHUR SYMONS. Fcap. 4to, cloth back,
gilt. With a Photogravure and Two other Portraits, a Colour-print
and Five Black-and-white Illustrations. The Portraits and two of the
Drawings have not been hitherto published. 2_s._ 6_d._ net.

THE OUTLOOK.--“An excellent monograph.”

=SIEGFRIED.= Woodcuts by T. S. MOORE. Fcap. 4to, 2_s._ 6_d._
net. [_In preparation._

=RUDYARD KIPLING.= Artist’s Signed Proofs (no other state) of the
Etched Portrait made from life in 1898, and exhibited in November,
1898, at the New English Art Club. £4 4_s._ net. [_Only Two remain._


MUSIC.

=THE CHORD.= A Quarterly devoted to Music. Imp. 16mo, strongly bound in
brown boards. Illustrated, 1_s._ net; or 5_s._ per annum, post free.

THE OUTLOOK.--“The Unicorn Press has rendered another service
to those who follow the best art of the day.”

=BAYREUTH AND MUNICH.= A Travelling Record of German Music. By
VERNON BLACKBURN. Imp. 16mo, boards, 1_s._ net.

=OLD SCORES AND NEW READINGS.= Discussions on Musical Subjects. By
JOHN F. RUNCIMAN. Imp. 16mo, gilt top, 5_s._ net.

THE MUSICAL STANDARD (in four column notice).--“He has always
something to say, and says it with considerable force.”

=THE FRINGE OF AN ART.= Appreciations in Music. By VERNON
BLACKBURN. With Portraits of Mozart, Berlioz, Gounod, and
Tschaikowski. Uniform with “Old Scores and New Readings.” 5_s._ net.

THE SATURDAY REVIEW.--“In its way a perfect bit of work.”

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MUSICIAN’S LIBRARY.

Edited by JOHN F. RUNCIMAN.

_The following Volumes (Imp. 16mo, cloth, each 2s. 6d. net) are in
preparation_:

=MOZART.= By VERNON BLACKBURN.
=GLÜCK.= By SIDNEY THOMPSON.
=PURCELL.= By the Editor.
=WAGNER.= By E. A. BAUGHAN.


At the Sign of the Unicorn, London.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RUE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


